This is the author’s version of a work that was accepted for publication in World
Development. Changes resulting from the publishing process, such as peer review, editing,
corrections, structural formatting, and other quality control mechanisms may not be
reflected in this document. Changes may have been made to this work since it was
submitted for publication. A definitive version was subsequently published in World
Development, 45 (2013) DOI: 10.1016/j.worlddev.2012.12.001
Published details:
Dercon, Stefan and Abhijeet Singh (2013) “From Nutrition to Aspirations and Self-Afficacy:
Gender Bias over Time among Children in Four Countries”, World Development 45: 31-50. DOI:
10.1016/j.worlddev.2012.12.001
This article is reproduced in accordance with the self-archiving policies of ELSEVIER

1

From Nutrition to Aspirations and Self-Efficacy:
Gender Bias over Time among Children in Four Countries

Stefan Dercon1, University of Oxford
Abhijeet Singh, University of Oxford

This version: November 2012
Forthcoming, World Development

Abstract
We use data on children at ages 8, 12 and 15 from Young Lives, a cohort study of 12,000
children across Ethiopia, India (Andhra Pradesh), Peru and Vietnam to document the
presence of a gender gap across indicators of nutrition, education, aspirations, subjective
well-being and psychosocial competencies. We find considerable heterogeneity across
countries, ages and indicators in the existence and direction of gender gaps. Second, we find
evidence of an 'institutionalized' gender bias against girls in education in India and, to an
extent, Ethiopia. Poorer non-cognitive skills could be a channel for continuing gender bias
through poorer labour market outcomes.

Keywords: Gender, Ethiopia, India, Peru, Vietnam, cohort study

1

We are grateful for comments from various members of the Young Lives team, the World Bank World
Development Report on Gender team, Liz Fajber at DFID and three anonymous referees. All errors are our
own. Young Lives is core-funded by UK aid from the Department for International Development (DFID) and cofunded from 2010 to 2014 by the Netherlands Ministry of Foreign Affairs. www.younglives.org.uk
2

1. INTRODUCTION

Gender equality is central to much of the discourse on development. It is enshrined in the
third Millennium Development Goal (MDG) and remains an important area of concern in
many dimensions, including MDG targets covering employment opportunities and political
representation, where women consistently have more negative outcomes. However in some
other dimensions, especially school enrolment, which is one of the most important aspects of
the MDGs relevant for children, gender gaps have declined considerably in the past two
decades: the ratio of girls to boys enrolled in primary education rose from 87 per cent to 96
per cent, and in secondary education from 78 per cent to 96 per cent, between 1991 and 2008
(United Nations 2011)2.

This paper focuses on gender-based inequalities as experienced by children across several
dimensions. The discussion hitherto on gender inequalities in child well-being has been
centred on a very restrictive set of indicators: from infancy until the age of five, child wellbeing is reduced to some measure of nutrition or the risk of dying, then it becomes a question
of enrolment into school, and by about age 15 indicators are reduced to a focus on labour
market participation and marriage. Much of this approach is necessitated by data availability
since most data on children come from population census data (for indicators such as
mortality), the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) and Multiple Indicator Cluster
Survey (MICS) data, as well as large household welfare monitoring surveys such as the
Living Standard Measurement Surveys (LSMS). This makes up, however, a very narrow
view of what matters for children and in this paper we aim to do better by analysing a much
richer range of indicators. We will document, by comparing data from different settings, the
2

In a recent review chapter Grant and Behrman (2010) comment that gender gaps in schooling in developing
countries are “becoming more like developed countries, with gender gaps that increasingly favour, rather than
discriminate against, females.”
3

presence and extent of a gender bias across a broader set of indicators, collected from cohorts
of children at the age of 8, 12 and 15 years in Ethiopia, Andhra Pradesh (India), Peru and
Vietnam. The data were collected using almost exactly the same instruments and are very
recent: in this paper, we use data collected in 2002, 2006 and 2009. The result is a
multidimensional snapshot of the current gender bias across parts of the developing world
with different cultural and socio-economic contexts.

The data presented here cover 13 indicators which include indicators on nutrition (height-forage, weight-for-age and BMI-for-age z-scores3), on education and achievement (enrolment
and also test scores in arithmetic and the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test), on educational
aspirations (reported by both children and by parents/caregivers), on subjective well-being
(reported by children, using the ‘ladder of life’, a measure of life satisfaction), and on four
psychosocial competencies (agency/self-efficacy, trust, pride/self-esteem, and inclusion). In
so doing, we complement the existing analyses on gender bias in childhood by offering a
more comprehensive picture of children’s skill formation during childhood, which includes
not only their cognitive skills as measured by conventional standardized test scores but also
their psychosocial development, such as in terms of agency or self-esteem, as well as valuing
children’s own perception of their lives through measures of life satisfaction and their
perceptions of inclusion.

The data come from the Young Lives cohort study, which aims to study the causes and
consequences of child poverty across these four countries. The survey covers two cohorts, the
first comprising about 4,000 children (1,000 per country) who were born in 1994–5 and the
3

BMI-for-age z scores refer to the body mass index (BMI) of children normalized to account for difference in
BMIs of boys and girls at different ages.
4

second comprising 8,000 children (2,000 per country) who were born in 2001–24. Starting in
2002, the study has followed these children for three rounds of data collection, in 2002, 2006
and 2009. The data are highly clustered and cover 20 sites, spread across urban and rural
areas in Ethiopia, Andhra Pradesh and Vietnam, and 80 sites in Peru. The cluster selection
and a relative oversampling of poorer households mean that the data are not nationally
representative, but rather miss typically the richest households in each country. Careful
comparisons with DHS and other surveys in each country nevertheless suggest that the data
are representative of the type of variation typically found in nationally representative surveys
(Escobal and Flores 2008; Kumra 2008; Nguyen 2008; Outes-Leon and Sanchez 2008).

Three main results stand out from our analysis. First, we find considerable heterogeneity in
gender bias. Gender biases are often specific to age groups, contexts and indicators, and the
bias is not always simply against girls. Second, we find strong evidence of an
‘institutionalized’ gender bias against girls in education in India, and, to a lesser extent, in
Ethiopia. This bias appears to emerge in the educational aspirations of parents for their
children at age 8, and is transmitted to the aspirations of children at 12. It is then transformed
into gender gaps in cognitive outcomes at age 15. We also observe lower self-efficacy (as
measured by agency) for girls in Ethiopia and India. Similar ‘institutionalized’ patterns exist
in Vietnam, but in the opposite direction – in favour of girls rather than boys. As these noncognitive skills are correlated with success in labour markets (Cunha and Heckman 2008),
they are likely to contribute to the perpetuation of bias in later life. Finally, we note that even
where gender biases manifest themselves strongly, they are sometimes overshadowed by
deprivations in other dimensions, such as caste or being in a rural area.

4

The only exception in this regard is Peru where only 716 children of the older cohort (born in 1994-95) were
covered due to resource constraints.
5

In the next section, we introduce first the data and the indicators used, as well as the method
used to document gaps. In section 3 we offer the core findings. In section 4 we extend the
analysis and ask whether the indicators are different when disaggregated by various
classifications, such as among poorer families, in rural rather than urban areas and by
different levels of education of the mother. Section 5 extends the analysis to look at
transmission of biases across dimensions over time for the same children. Section 6 presents
two further extensions: a within-family analysis of gender bias using household fixed effects;
and an analysis of cohort effects by comparing 8-year old children in 2002 and 2009. Section
7 discusses our findings, and the final section concludes.

2. DATA AND METHOD

The Young Lives data are unique in their breadth and scope among developing country
datasets: large cohorts of children and their caregivers are systematically interviewed on a
wide variety of indicators. As previously noted, even though the data are relatively highly
clustered, careful analysis of the samples suggests that they are broadly representative of all
but the richest children in each of the countries studied. Attrition in the Young Lives survey
is very low with, in all countries, still more than 95 per cent of the original sample
represented in the data (Outes-Leon and Dercon 2008); children are tracked wherever they
move to and about 1.5 percentage points of this attrition is accounted for by mortality.

The questionnaires were developed with inputs from researchers in a variety of disciplines,
including experts in education, health, child psychology and anthropology. Instruments were
chosen for their suitability to be used in a variety of cultural and social settings and were

6

designed to be appropriate for the age of the children at the time. In this paper, we use 13
indicators. Appendix A documents the indicators used in the analysis, and their definition or
procedure of computation. Some – nutrition indicators, enrolment data and test scores5 – are
rather standard. The nutrition data use the z-score transformations proposed by the WHO
2005 conventions; in principle comparability across settings is possible. Together, these
indicators offer a sense of the child’s physical and cognitive development.

However, child well-being comprises more than this. Some of the indicators included aim to
capture children’s own perceived well-being as well as at least one aspect of their hopes for
the future. In particular, child aspiration indicators refer to direct questions asked of children
and parents about the desired levels of education if no constraints were to exist; almost all
children will have gone to school at some point and thus the question has appeared
meaningful to all. Subjective well-being is assessed here using the standard instrument - the
ladder of life - familiar from, for example, the World Value Surveys. Its validity and
implementation in research on children is discussed in Camfield et al. (2008) and the sources
cited therein.

We also aimed to capture children’s perception of themselves and the opportunities they
perceive as being available to them from a psychosocial point of view. These indicators have
intrinsic value; furthermore other work, summarized in Cunha and Heckman (2008), has
shown that such indicators can have strong predictive power for future job attainment,
earnings, and even crime and antisocial behaviour. These psychosocial indicators are based

5

For test scores, extensive validation work has been conducted for cross-cultural comparisons for the 2006
round, and the general advice is to be cautious about using it across countries; as a result we only report raw
scores and not standardized scores (as this would invite apparent comparisons). See Cueto et al. (2008). The
use of test scores alongside enrolment patterns adds richness to the analysis of gender gaps in education since
our concern is typically not only about gaps in enrolment but also in achievement once in school; this point is
stressed by Grant and Behrman (2010) as well.
7

on existing scales, but had to be adjusted to be relevant for children. They refer to children’s
trust (similar to more common generalized trust measures), pride and self-esteem (building
on Rosenberg 1965), agency or self-efficacy (building on the concept of locus of control,
Rotter 1966; and Bandura 1993) and sense of inclusion or discrimination. In Dercon and
Krishnan (2009) these measures were broadly validated, although the relatively small number
of questions may well result in measurement error affecting precision.

For most of the analysis in this paper, we only use data from the 2006 and 2009 rounds of the
study and analyse gender-based inequalities as experienced by the children in our sample at
8, 12 and 15 years of age approximately. We select these three ages, and ignore observations
at younger ages, as most of the innovative indicators (subjective well-being, child aspirations
and psychosocial competencies) could only be asked once children had reached about 8. As a
result, we use data from the older cohort (born in 1994/95) collected in 2006 and 2009 (when
they had reached age 12 and 15), and data from the Younger Cohort (born 2001/02) from
2009 (when they were aged 8). In the first round of data collection in 2002, the older cohort
had only been offered a shorter questionnaire; while we use this data in Section 6 to compare
gender gap over time for children aged 8 years in 2002 and 2009, we do not use data from the
2002 round in the rest of the paper.

We investigated the gender gap first in the simplest possible way: by comparing the
difference in the means between boys and girls at various ages. A second set of results uses a
multivariate regression approach and presents the gender gap in various indicators after
controlling for a series of other possible covariates for the indicators used. In particular, we
ran regressions in which the indicator was regressed on a dummy for gender (1=male) as well
as the logarithm of total consumption expenditure, education of the mother, household size,

8

ethnicity/caste and urban/rural location of residence6. The advantage of this approach is to
provide possibly greater precision in estimates as well as to account for the possibility that
households with girls differ significantly along socio-economic dimensions from households
with boys (for example due to sex-selective abortions or due to selective stopping rules for
fertility) in which case estimates of gender gaps from a difference-in-means might be
misleading.
More importantly for our purposes, this approach allows for simple extensions that allow for
interaction effects with socio-economic variables like poverty or maternal education and will
allow us to see the impact of relatively simple explanations on the persistence of gender
effects, as well as suggesting some mediating factors. For example, if the gender effects are
reduced once we control for an interaction of gender with the education of the caregiver, then
this is at least suggestive evidence of how these effects are being perpetuated (even though
this is at best suggestive, and not a framework for full causal analysis). To explore the
possibility that gender inequality is specifically or differentially linked to particular groups,
such as rural or poor or poorly educated households, we offer in section 4 some further
analysis, using the same regression approach, but this time using also interaction effects with
the gender dummy for these characteristics.7
In Section 5, we extend the regression analysis further by using the panel dimension of the
data to assess whether gender gaps documented at the age of 12 reproduce themselves at the
age of 15 years and whether they lead to the creation of gender gaps in other indicators (for
example, from agency at age 12 to enrolment at age 15). In Section 6, for a subset of
indicators, we restrict the regression analysis to comparing boys and girls in the same
household (using household fixed effects) to document the robustness of our findings.
6

In all regressions in this paper, standard errors are clustered by the community the household was first
interviewed in 2002.
7
Note that the regression-based results will allow us to avoid problems of comparison between the data from
2006 and 2009: in all countries, substantial growth has taken place, so that by controlling for socio-economic
factors, we can ensure closer comparability of the results from these different years.
9

3. BASIC RESULTS: GENDER GAPS AND INTERPRETATION

Table 1 presents the means of the outcome variables used in our regressions, disaggregated
by gender, for children aged 15 years, 12 years and 8 years respectively for the four study
countries. Table 2 presents the coefficients on the male dummy variable after controlling for
various covariates.8

There is a wealth of data on various indicators in Tables 1 and 2, not necessarily very
surprising when considered individually but which, taken together, show the striking
heterogeneity in the presence of bias and in its direction across countries, stages in a child’s
life cycle and indicators. Certainly there is no simplistic boy bias, even within particular
countries, on all indicators. While some striking patterns emerge, they are frequently more
nuanced than is often emphasized in the narrative on gender disparities in development9.

[Table 1 near here]

Considering the first three variables presented in Table 210, which focus on educational
outcomes, a key contrast can be observed between India and Ethiopia on the one hand and

8

In practice, it is generated by running a regression of the indicator onto the gender dummy (male=1) and a
constant, and the coefficient on the gender dummy is the effect.
9
In this paper we will not be engaging in a systematic review of the academic and advocacy literature on
gender gaps. However, in order to contrast our results (showing a large degree of heterogeneity in gender
gaps in magnitude and direction) to a general narrative of anti-girl bias, consider the following passage from a
recent report: “We are failing our girls. Although a precious asset for the present and future, girls in
developing countries are in trouble. Girls and young women are generally less educated, less healthy, and less
free than their male peers. They face systematic disadvantages over a wide range of welfare indicators,
including health, education, nutrition, labor force participation, and the burden of household tasks.” (Levine
et. al., 2008)
10
Throughout this paper, our test statistics do not correct for multiple comparisons. It is therefore likely that at
least some significant results are due to chance. We do not think this is as much of a concern for most of the
results in the paper which are based simply on mean differences and are consistent with regression results
where controlling for covariates provides more precise estimates as well as (for a subset of comparable
outcomes) results from within-household specifications. Moreover, for most indicators that we point out
10

Vietnam on the other. In terms of cognitive achievement, a clear pro-boy bias is present in
Ethiopia and India, which is not necessarily apparent at an early age, but by the age of 12 and
especially 15 years, is most pronounced. In contrast, in Vietnam we find a tendency for a progirl bias in achievement, strongly significant for mathematics. At an early age there is a clear
bias in test scores in favour of boys in Peru, but this tends to disappear at a later age.

[Table 2 near here]

These findings for school achievement tend to mirror child and parental aspirations. We
observe a striking association between parental and child aspirations, and between aspirations
and outcomes, especially in the three countries where we find significant bias by the age of
15 in achievement. We collected parental aspirations when the children were aged 8 and 12
years. Parental aspirations at an early age are biased towards boys in India, while in Vietnam
they are in favour of girls; by the age of 12 they are biased towards boys in Ethiopia and
India. This pattern mirrors child aspirations: by the age of 12 and 15, they are significantly
biased in the same direction as parents’ aspirations at the age of 8 and 12, with clearly higher
aspirations for boys in India and Ethiopia, and for girls in Vietnam. It is, however, also worth
noting that the gap between the educational aspirations of boys and girls in Andhra Pradesh,
where this gap is widest in our data, is only half as wide as the gap in parental aspirations for
their education at the age of 12 years; clearly, even though there may be inter-generational
transfer of low or biased aspirations to girls in this context, the bias is not reproduced

gender biases in the main analysis, gender gaps are significant even at the 1% level of significance indicating
that the possibility of these being spurious findings is low: under the (extreme) limiting assumption of
independence of outcomes, Bonferroni corrections would require that we divide the p-values by the number
of comparisons; the key results of the paper are robust to this correction . However, this is potentially an issue
for the results on heterogeneous effects (across urban/rural areas, maternal education and poverty terciles);
in this case, we follow a conservative approach of interpreting only a few results where these seem to be
either consistent across age groups for a particular indicator, or across indicators for a particular axis of
heterogeneity, or if there are a large number of significant reported impacts in a particular table.
11

perfectly and girls’ own aspirations exceed those of their parents for them. The correlation
with actual achievement in these countries is striking, and consistent with a narrative of
institutionalized gender bias which is nested in the norms and values of parents, and then
transmitted to children (at least in part), contributing to lower achievement. The causality
from aspirations to achievement is still a debated issue in educational psychology and
sociology (Saha 1997), but these patterns are very suggestive.

It is important also to note here that even though the direction of bias in both achievement
and aspirations seems to be very similar for children at 15 years of age in Ethiopia and India,
the implied magnitudes are very different. Consistent with our other findings, the magnitude
of bias in favour of boys is much larger in India than in Ethiopia. These differential findings
across the four countries highlight not just the heterogeneity within developing countries in
the existence and direction of gender-based inequalities, but also their size, across different
contexts. Although we do not present coefficients of other variables here, it is also germane
to note that gender is not always the key axis of disadvantage: for example, at the age of 15
years, the disadvantageous effect of living in a rural area in Ethiopia is twice as much on
child educational aspirations, one-and-a-half times as much on maths scores, and five times
as much on PPVT scores as the disadvantage from being a girl11.

Turning to nutritional status, assessed here through three anthropometric indicators, the
patterns are similarly striking and typically point to a pro-female bias in all four countries.
This is apparent at the age of 8 years in Ethiopia and India for height-for-age and weight-forage; in the 15 year old cohort, the BMI-for-age shows a marked pro-girl gap in all countries.
Across our specifications and samples, we find only limited evidence of boys doing better
11

For the purpose of demonstration of this point, we have presented the coefficients for covariates from
regressions on a sub-set of outcomes from the 15-year old sample from Ethiopia in Appendix B.
12

than girls across nutritional indicators (height-for-age in India and Peru at the ages of 12 and
15 and BMI-for-age at the age of 8 years in Peru and Vietnam); where significant differences
do exist between boys and girls, they are considerably more likely to be favouring girls than
not.
Our results on nutritional indicators, indicating that where significant differences in nutrition
indicators exist they are more likely to favour girls, corroborate the evidence from current
and previous reviews of any gender gaps in nutrition indicators. Svedberg (1990) reviews
more than 50 different datasets from sub-Saharan Africa and reports finding no evidence that
girls are at an disadvantage to boys; many samples display no statistically significant gaps but
in most populations, it seems there is a slight differential to the disadvantage of males. More
recently, Marcoux (2002) reviews the summary statistics from 306 surveys of child nutrition
and, consistent with the results in Svedberg (1990), and our own results, he reports that
results from most surveys (227 out of 306) display no evidence of any sex differentials across
stunting, wasting and underweight. Where statistically significant differences are found, they
are much more likely to be favouring girls than boys; of 40 surveys that find evidence of
statistically significant sex differentials in stunting, girls are more affected in only one case
and boys in 39; of 30 such cases in the prevalence of underweight, girls are more affected in
four cases, boys in 26 cases; and finally, for wasting, out of 35 cases with significant sex
differentials, girls are affected in 9 cases and boys in 26. Anti-female biases noted in previous
data from China, India, Jamaica and Sri Lanka are no longer found in more recent surveys at
the national level (at least for preschool age children).

It is not clear what the source of this disadvantage for boys in nutritional indicators is.
Marcoux (2002) comments on several possibilities. The first of these is sex-selective abortion
but it seems unlikely that this would necessarily account for such a pattern outside South Asia

13

and China. The second possibility is that this pattern reflects some systematic differences in
the reference populations for men and women in the WHO norms. However, this also seems
unlikely: as Svedberg (1990) demonstrated, the results are actually robust to the application
of different reference standards. It seems unlikely that boys get systematically poorer feeding
(including in contexts that gender gaps in other measures of investments on children are
strikingly male-biased) across these different contexts. One possible explanation forwarded
by Marcoux (2002) might be that “boys exhibit less favourable nutritional outcomes in some
places because, given a less adequate food supply, girls tend to cope with it better than boys
from the standpoint of bodily development.” We are not aware of any conclusive evidence in
this regard.12

In terms of subjective well-being, the data suggest a move from no significant differential (or
if anything, a pro-boy differential) in answers to the ladder of life question at the age of 8 to a
pronounced and significant pro-girl differential equivalent to about a quarter of a step at the
age of 15. In general, girls in this sample suggest a higher subjective well-being than boys.
This effect is present in all countries, albeit with varying degrees of significance. This result
needs to be interpreted cautiously since it is possible that girls are socialized into having
lower expectations for themselves and to be more satisfied by less. As Sen (1992) argues
eloquently, in the case of entrenched inequalities the extent of a person’s deprivations may
not show up at all in a metric of desire fulfilment owing to a downward adaptation of the best
possible life that the individual visualizes for himself/herself.

12

For the purposes of this paper, we merely seek to highlight that the patterns of gender bias are not always
unidirectional against girls; as Marcoux (2002) comments, the widespread belief in an anti-female bias in
intrahousehold food allocation seems to be unsupported by the evidence and relies on a limited number of
small scale studies which are based on outdated data; this general conclusion resonates well with our own
findings.
14

Finally, in terms of psychosocial competencies, the patterns may at first seem very
heterogeneous, but on closer inspection, a few distinct patterns appear. Two strong effects are
worth highlighting here. A first finding is that across three of the four countries, (Ethiopia,
Peru and Vietnam) girls at the age of 15 have significantly lower trust in members of their
immediate society than boys, possibly reflecting personal, parental and community values
and fears related to girls reaching marriageable age.

A second finding, possibly more importantly, is that agency or self-efficacy (measuring the
extent to which a person feels in charge of his/her life and destiny, and therefore sometimes
referred to as a measure of empowerment), has a striking pro-male bias in India and Ethiopia
(although not statistically significant in the latter) by the age of 15. As this psychosocial
competence is essentially a forward-looking indicator (Bandura 1993) and has been shown to
correlate with investment in the future (Bernard et al. 2011), the similarity with the
aspirations and findings on education, both in terms of aspirations and achievement is
striking. In social psychology, social cognitive theory posits that goals and aspirations come
about from self-efficacy (Miller and Dollard 1941, themselves building on social learning
theories): for example, self-efficacy regulates students’ aspirations, motivation and, in the
end, achievements (Bandura 1993). While our indicator of self-efficacy goes beyond
education, it confirms a chain of evidence consistent with this view. As self-efficacy is
shaped during earlier childhood, not least via norms and value transmission, and
encouragement or discouragement by parents,13 referring to the presence of an
institutionalized bias would not be inappropriate in India, and possibly Ethiopia. Such a chain
of transmission of gendered bias against girls is not present in the data from Peru and
13

Bandura (1993) summarizes that self-efficacy stems from at least four sources: mastery experiences
(learning from success and failure), vicarious experiences (learning from social models), social persuasion
(responding to encouragement), and emotional strength (stamina or raising ability to respond to stress).
Krishnan and Krutikova (2010) report on how efficacy among adolescents in slums of Bombay is both shaped
by parents’ views and possibly affected by positive encouragement by NGO intervention.
15

Vietnam; on the contrary, to some extent it is present in the Vietnamese data in the opposite
direction, i.e. in favour of girls, going from parental aspirations for girls to higher aspirations
on the part of girls for themselves in comparison to boys and finally into higher educational
achievement for girls.14

4. EXTENSION: IS BIAS CONDITIONED BY POVERTY,MATERNAL
EDUCATION OR LOCATION?

In this section, we explore whether the overall effects are heterogeneous within each country.
In particular, are gaps larger or smaller when focusing on poorer, less educated, or rural
settings. Our approach here is simple: we augment the basic regression specification from
section 3 (including a gender dummy and various covariates as controls) by adding an
interaction term between the gender dummy variable and the dimension regarding which we
want to study any variation in gender bias, such as urban/rural location of residence or
mother’s education. We report the coefficients on the gender dummy variable and the
interaction term for all regressions of this form to enable an examination of any heterogeneity
within a country in the nature of gender bias in a dimension.

[Tables 3A and 3B near the following para]

4.1 Urban versus rural location

14

The gender differences in the self-efficacy indicator are mainly driven by the question: ‘Other people in my
family make all the decisions about how I spend my time’. It appears that in this question boys generally reflect
greater agency than girls. Furthermore, the answers are not positively correlated as expected with other
questions in the index. Interpreting this is not self-evident. On the one hand, being able to make one’s own
decisions about one’s life is clearly an important dimension of agency; on the other hand, if girls allow this to
happen consciously in order to open up opportunities in response to cultural or other local factors, then
perhaps interpreting this as reflecting low agency is not straightforward.

16

Tables 3A and 3B report the results from considering whether living in an urban setting
changes some of the sex differentials reported in the previous section. A few results are
striking. First, the evidence suggests that the gap in favour of boys, from the educational
aspirations of parents and children and test score results, is considerably stronger in rural
areas in Andhra Pradesh, with a lower incidence or (statistically significant) absence of a gap
in urban areas. In Peru, the pro-girl bias in parental aspirations at an early age, present in both
rural and urban areas, appears to translate into pro-girl bias at the age of 12 for girls in urban
areas only, but by this age, a pro-male parental educational bias exists in rural areas. These
patterns persist in child educational aspirations at the age of 15. In short, there appear to be
elements of divergence in attitudes towards gender and education between rural and urban
Peru. Finally, in Vietnam, the parental pro-girl bias at age 8 is strikingly only present in rural
areas. Looking at nutrition outcomes, the most striking pattern is that the pro-male biases at
the age of 8 years in BMI-for-age and weight-for-age in both Peru and Vietnam are
considerably higher in urban than in rural areas.

Turning to the psychosocial indicators, there are some differences in the extent of gender bias
across rural and urban areas but not necessarily presenting a systematic pattern. The pro-male
gender bias in agency in India at 15 years of age, for example, seems to be concentrated only
in urban areas. On the other hand, in Peru it seems that there is a significant pro-girl bias in
pride and self-esteem at the age of 15 years in urban but not in rural areas. Again, consistent
with the educational aspirations data, rural and urban Peru are characterized by rather
different gender differences in indicators relevant for forward-looking behaviour.

[Tables 4A and 4B near the following para]
4.2 Maternal education
17

Results from a similar analysis regarding mother’s education are reported in Tables 4A and
4B. Maternal education emerges as a significant ameliorating factor in reducing gender
inequalities across all our study countries in a range of outcomes. For example, for Ethiopian
children aged 15, having an educated mother reduced inequalities substantially in the PPVT
test scores, in children’s own educational aspirations, and in their height-for-age (although
the coefficient is not statistically significant). A similar pattern is observed in India for test
scores at 15 years of age and educational aspirations (both by parents and children) at the age
of 12 years, where many of the gaps essentially disappear for girls who have mothers
educated for 12 years or more. In Vietnam as well, having an educated mother helps reduce
disadvantages faced by boys in BMI-for-age and weight-for-age (at 8 years of age), and BMIfor-age and height-for-age (at 15 years of age).

[Tables 5A and 5B near the following para]

4.3 Poor versus non-poor households
The impact of interaction terms distinguishing the gender gap for the poorest tercile in the
(consumption per capita) distribution and the other two terciles is relatively limited (Tables
5A and 5B). First, in terms of the education variables, there is no differential gender gap
between richer and poorer households in aspirations on the part of caregivers and children in
India – in other words, the male bias is present among richer and poorer households alike.
However, unlike boys from richer households, poorer boys in India are no more likely than
poorer girls in both these countries to be enrolled in school at 15 years of age; this may reflect
a pattern where both boys and girls in poorer households are often expected or necessitated to
contribute economically to the household by their teenage years, which requires them to leave
school. In Ethiopia poorer boys are significantly less likely to be enrolled than poorer girls,
18

reflecting perhaps the higher opportunity costs of school attendance for adolescent boys.
Perhaps as a reflection of this lower rate of enrolment for older boys in poorer households, in
India, the male bias in the PPVT and the maths test appears to be less for boys from poor
households at least at age 8 for the PPVT and age 12 for the maths test.

In terms of nutrition, more striking is that the pattern of pro-girl nutritional bias in height-forage is, if anything, most pronounced among the poorest households, with significant evidence
in Vietnam at the age of 8 years and again at 15 years, and in Peru at the age of 15 years as
well.
Finally, relatively few new patterns emerge in terms of the psychosocial competencies.

5.

EXPLORING THE TRANSMISSION OF GENDER GAPS IN ASPIRATIONS TO
OUTCOMES
The data in sections 3 and 4 are suggestive of a link between parental aspirations, children’s
aspirations, educational achievement, and possibly even empowerment. The key contrast was
in Andhra Pradesh (especially the rural areas), Ethiopia and to some extent rural Peru on the
one hand, and Vietnam on the other. In terms of cognitive achievement and aspirations, a
clear pro-boy bias is present in Ethiopia and India, which is not necessarily apparent at early
age, but which, by the age of 12 and especially 15 years, is pronounced.15 In contrast, in
Vietnam, we find a tendency for a pro-girl bias in aspirations and achievement, strongly
significant for mathematics. In rural Peru, there appears to be a pro-boy bias in the aspirations
of parents for children at age 12 and in the aspirations of children at age 15 in rural areas. In
Ethiopia and India finally, there also seems to be some pro-male bias effect on agency as
well, in line with these aspirations and achievements.
15

Note that the bias in Andhra Pradesh is striking also as it is a southern Indian state, while most discussion on
pronounced gender bias tends to focus on the north of India.
19

The method used is not complete, not only in terms of the mechanisms of causality (which
cannot convincingly be established within the confines of this paper), but also in terms of
basic associations. It could be that while on average there are pro-male biases in a particular
set of indicators, individuals experiencing the bias are different for different indicators, so
that a link is hardly plausible. To explore this further, we looked in each country at the link
between parental aspirations and child aspirations, and aspirations and educational outcomes,
using a regression analysis with otherwise the same specification as above. We also
investigate whether these aspirations are associated with agency at the age of 15 as well.
Furthermore, we investigate whether there is persistence in the psychosocial outcomes
between the age of 12 and 15 years; an analysis of this question is important for assessing
whether gender gaps in these outcomes only affect other outcomes contemporaneously or
whether they contribute to the persistence of inequality.
In practice, this means that earlier regressions exploring child aspirations and educational
outcomes are augmented by parental and child aspirations respectively. Two issues are
explored. First, is there a positive and significant association? Second, does augmenting this
regression reduce the size of the gender gap? Both should be expected if there is a genuine
transmission – as some of the gender bias would then be included in the parental,
respectively, child aspiration variable (i.e. biased aspirations).

[Table 6 near the following para]

The results are consistent with the idea of a transmission from parents to children’s
aspirations. In all four countries (Table 6), we find a positive and strongly significant link
between parental aspirations at age 12 and child aspirations at age 15, controlling for other

20

family characteristics. Furthermore, child aspirations at age 15 show a positive and strongly
significant contemporaneous correlation in explaining enrolment at that age, controlling for
the other child and family characteristics. They also reduce the size of the bias in line with the
hypothesis, at least in India and in Vietnam (reducing the bias by about half) 16. Similarly,
children’s own aspirations at the age of 12 are a strongly significant predictor of PPVT and
maths test scores in all countries as well, and once they are controlled for, the gender bias
observed tends to become smaller.

These children’s aspirations at age 12 also feed through into the child’s sense of self-efficacy
(agency) in all countries by age 15; parental aspirations matter also for agency in India, as
well as in Vietnam and Peru, again underlying how parents’ hopes for children tend to
translate into children’s self-efficacy, their sense of being able to achieve what they hope for.
Even if the causal role of aspirations in achievement is still debated, these results confirm the
institutional basis of bias in attitudes to boys or girls in education, whereby biased parental
aspirations translate into similarly biased child aspirations, consistent with observed
educational achievement bias as well as the child’s sense of agency. Existing gaps in
aspirations by parents appear to be transmitted in important child outcomes.

Of course, this does not answer where these biased aspirations come from. They could come
from norms or values, or the transmission of information on the economic returns to boys
versus girls in local labour markets, or other factors. Full understanding of them is well
beyond the scope of this paper.
6. EXTENSIONS – HOUSEHOLD FIXED EFFECTS AND COHORT EFFECTS

16

To see the reduction in the bias, compare the coefficients on the male dummy in Table 6 to coefficients in
Table 2.
21

In this section, we extend our results in two directions: estimating the gender gaps across
different indicators based only on within-family comparisons, and explicitly discussing
cohort effects by looking at gender gaps across outcomes for 8-year old children in 2002 and
2009.

Firstly, for a subset of indicators, we are able to estimate gender gaps through household
fixed effects and identify gender differentials based on the comparison of siblings of different
sexes in the same household. These results should bolster our confidence in the results being
a reflection of genuine sex differentials as they preclude explanations of these gaps being
related to any background characteristics of the households.
In 2009, the survey collected anthropometric data and PPVT test scores for one sibling of the
younger cohort children (then aged 8). The next younger sibling of the Young Lives ‘index
child’ was chosen; in case a younger sibling could not be found, the next older sibling was
administered the PPVT and measured for anthropometry17. The PPVT was not administered
to siblings in India. In all rounds of the survey (2002, 2006 and 2009), enrolment details were
collected for all individuals between 5-17 years of age. Therefore, we have comparable data
on siblings on five of the indicators from the previous sections: three anthropometric
indicators (weight-for-age, height-for-age and BMI-for-age), enrolment and PPVT test scores
(except in India); unfortunately, information on psychosocial outcomes or educational
aspirations of parents and children are not available for the siblings in the data. We use this
information to carry out within-family investigations by regressing each outcome on a male
17

The procedures for collecting anthropometric and test data on siblings were not identical across countries
which should be noted for the purpose of interpreting the results. In Peru, data was only collected for the next
younger sibling of the index child; where there was no younger sibling, data were not collected. In India, the
PPVT test was not administered to siblings. Finally, although anthropometric measurements were
administered to one sibling of each YL child who had a sibling in the household, the month of birth was
reported as ‘Not Known’ in nearly half (752) of the siblings in india (but not in the other countries) which
precludes us from computing the anthropometric scores for these children. In India and Ethiopia,
anthropometric data was also collected for the siblings of the older cohort children (aged 15 years in 2009) in
the third round of data collection; this data has not been used in this paper.
22

dummy, a dummy variable for each value of age in completed years, and a set of household
fixed effects; identification of the gender gap is achieved from those households which had
siblings of different sexes in the same household. We have restricted the regressions on
enrolment to children between 6-15 years of age (inclusive).

[Table 7 near following paragraph]

Results from the household fixed effects specifications are given in Table 7. Results on the
different indicators corroborate patterns reported in previous tables although fewer are
significant (as we would expect due to lower power in the household fixed effects
specifications). Height-for-age z scores are pro-girl biased in Ethiopia by about 0.14 SD
which is almost exactly the same coefficient as reported for 8 year old children in Table 2.
Similarly, BMI-for-age coefficients in India and Peru are almost identical to coefficients that
we found for 8 year olds in Table 2. Enrolment in school is pro-girl biased in Ethiopia and
Vietnam (although not statistically significant in the latter) and pro-boy biased in India which
also agrees with previous results. Finally, PPVT scores are pro-boy biased in Peru by a
similar magnitude as in the baseline specification in Table 2. The close correspondence
between the within-family estimates and the basic regression results in Table 2 is heartening
because it indicates that our main results are not significantly biased by any householdspecific unobervables; gender seems to be mostly randomly distributed across households, as
we would expect.

As a final extension, we present the extent of the gender gap across a subset of comparable
indicators for the older cohort (born in 1994/95) from 2002 and the younger cohort (born in
2001/02) in 2009; at the time of the surveys, the cohorts were aged around 8 years which

23

make them well-suited for comparison. This exercise is particularly useful from two
perspectives: it helps us analyze changes in gender bias (if any) in the intervening period of
seven years which is particularly relevant for our study countries which have undergone rapid
economic growth in this period; and it helps us distinguish between cohort effects and
maturation (or “age-stage”) effects, a distinction that is otherwise lost in comparing 8-year
olds in 2009 with 12 and 15 year olds in 2006 and 2009.

The survey in 2002 was shorter and did not administer comparable questions on psychosocial
outcome or aspirations. The survey also did not administer the PPVT or a detailed math
test.Therefore, we have only four outcomes - the three anthropometric measures and
enrolment - which are comparable. In order to compare the two cohorts, we just present the
mean and standard deviations of these variables across boys and girls in 2002 and 2009.
Results are presented in Table 8.

[Table 8 near following paragraph]

As can be seen, there is remarkable consistency in the outcomes on which we detect any
gender gaps for 8-year olds in 2002 and 2009 in the four study areas. Weight-for-age and
enrolment seem to have improved for both boys and girls in Ethiopia but the (pro-girl) gender
differential is significant in both rounds with a similar absolute gap for enrolment and a
possibly smaller one for weight-for-age. Similarly in India, the (pro-girl) differential in
weight-for-age and BMI-for-age remains statistically significant and of roughly the same
magnitude in both rounds. In Peru, the (pro-boy) differential on BMI-for-age is significant in
both rounds. Finally, in Vietnam, while (pro-girl) differentials on weight-for-age and heightfor-age are significant at the 10% level in 2002, they are no longer so in 2009; however, a

24

pro-girl bias in enrolment seems to be significant in 2009 but quantitatively small in
magnitude.
The results in Table 8 suggest that there is little change in the presence and magnitude of
gender gaps across these outcomes in this 7-year period in our study countries, even where
outcomes seem to have improved overall (such as in Ethiopia).

7. DISCUSSION

Our analysis in this paper has highlighted several possibly important patterns in gender-based
inequalities in the four study countries. The most important of these is that there is no
common thread that can be used to characterize gender inequalities across these different
countries or indeed even across different dimensions of child well-being in the same country
or across different ages. That such a narrow characterization of gender gaps across the
developing world has sometimes been made is conceivably a product of a narrow approach to
the different dimensions of child well-being, prompted perhaps by data limitations. Our
results highlight the importance of considering context and the age of the children being
spoken about while discussing gender bias.

While the analysis presented in this paper is relatively simple and has not engaged in the
detailed exploration of the mechanisms of gender bias, understanding these mechanisms is
central to being able to identify possible policy levers to ameliorate these inequalities. This is
important especially in view of the fact that all of these four countries have seen relatively
rapid economic growth and changes in social conditions which may well have led to changes
in the mechanisms by which gender bias presents itself. Complementary work from the
Young Lives study and elsewhere could help in identifying these dimensions of change.

25

In the case of India, for example, the rapid increases in enrolment across most states has
reduced substantially the gender inequality in enrolment; however, as recent analysis from
Young Lives shows (see Woodhead et. al., 2012; Pells, 2011; Streuli et al. 2011), this has
been accompanied by a sharp increase in unequal access between boys and girls to Englishlanguage-medium and private schools, which are widely perceived to deliver better education
and lead to better employment opportunities. Whereas Kingdon (2005) found, using data
from 1994, that the important dimension of gender bias in parental investment in education
was through parents deciding not to enrol girls, and not through differences between the
educational expenditure on boys and girls once they were enrolled, that pattern seems to have
since reversed itself almost entirely18.

Furthermore, while our analysis above documents the gender-based differences that are
detected in the data, it has not engaged in depth with the implications of these differences.
Yet, apart from their intrinsic value, we care about emerging inequalities in these dimensions
of child well-being also because they may be strongly predictive of future outcomes. Cunha
and Heckman (2008) and Cunha et al. (2010) for example document the importance of noncognitive skills (similar to what we call psychosocial skills in this paper) even in the
production of cognitive skills. This pattern is confirmed using Young Lives data from Peru
from Rounds 1 and 2 of the survey by Outes-Leon et al. (2010) who found that a child’s

18

Azam and Kingdon (2011) contrast their results using nationally representative data from 2005 with the
results in Kingdon (2005): whereas Kingdon (2005) had found significantly lower enrolment for girls in the 5-9
age group in 9 out of 16 major states in 1994, this difference was found in only two states in 2005; while a
greater number of states seemed to have lower enrolment for girls in older age groups (10-14 years and 15-19
years), even in these age groups both the incidence and the magnitude of the bias seemed to have declined
very sharply. In contrast, Azam and Kingdon (2011) find significant evidence of a pro-male bias in education
expenditure across several states using child-level data on education expenditure. This bias in education
expenditure seems to be driven, at least in part, by a much greater propensity of parents to enrol boys in (feepaying) private schools; Maitra et. al. (2011) document that in 2005 the extent of gender bias in rural private
school enrolment seems double that of bias in enrolment.
26

feeling of being respected at the age of 8 years was strongly predictive of higher test scores at
the age of 12. Helmers and Patnam (2011) build on the methodology in Cunha et. al. (2008)
and apply a Linear Structural Relations model to Young Lives data from 2002 and 2007. For
the older cohort of children, born in1994/95, they document that there is strong evidence of
cognitive skills at the age of eight leading to a greater stock of both cognitive and noncognitive skills at the age of 12.

Similarly, early differences in nutrition could further affect later outcomes in other
dimensions. For example, again using Young Lives data on Peru from 2002 and 2006,
Sanchez (2009) reports a strongly significant impact of early childhood nutrition on later
cognitive outcomes; this is, of course, a well-established result in the academic literature
from a variety of contexts (see, for example, Glewwe et al. 2001; Glewwe and King 2001;
Alderman et al. 2001). Thus, perhaps the critical point to realize about these inequalities is
that not only do they present us with important equity concerns at one point in time, but they
could also have important effects in perpetuating inequality, not only in the same dimension
but also across other dimensions of well-being that we may care about.

27

8. POLICY IMPLICATIONS AND CONCLUSION

In this paper, we have attempted only to characterize the patterns of gender-based inequalities
as experienced by children across a range of dimensions, at different ages within childhood
and adolescence, across our four study countries. We have not, as emphasized in the previous
section and elsewhere in the paper, attempted a full-fledged causal analysis of the
mechanisms that perpetuate these inequalities.

That being said, there are some distinct common threads that arise from our analysis that may
have useful implications for policy. The first of these threads, emphasized throughout this
paper, is that we find no evidence of a common narrative of gender bias that is valid across
all four countries and all dimensions; recognition of this heterogeneity in the patterns of
inequality is, in our opinion, of central importance to effective policy-making, i.e. policymaking that is targeted towards reducing the specific biases that do exist in different contexts.

The second thread, implicit in our analytical approach, is that in commenting on gender
inequalities in child well-being there is a need to consider dimensions of child welfare
beyond those commonly documented in large-scale data collection efforts, especially in
developing countries. Ignoring these dimensions risks painting a very incomplete picture;
moreover, as discussed in the previous section, these frequently unmeasured dimensions of
child wellbeing may have detrimental impacts also on indicators that we do measure. This
empirical pattern, of inequalities in one dimension perpetuating themselves in other
dimensions of well-being, is in our view perhaps one of the most salient features around
gender inequality. Finally, as we hope the discussion in the previous section has highlighted,
it is an important exercise to monitor the mechanisms by which gender inequalities may be

28

presenting themselves. This is important both for understanding how inequalities in different
dimensions interact and in formulating interventions targeted at breaking the cycle of
perpetuation of these inequalities across dimensions. Child-focused longitudinal data such as
those collected by Young Lives can be an important source of information both on commonly
neglected dimensions of well-being and for being able to convincingly draw out causal chains
of the perpetuation of gender-based inequalities.

29

REFERENCES
Alderman, H., Behrman,J.R., Lavy,V. and Menon,R. (2001) ‘Child Health and school enrollment: A
longitudinal analysis’ Journal of Human Resources 36.1: 185–205
Azam, M., & Kingdon, G. (2011). Are Girls the Fairer Sex in India? Revisiting Intra-Household Allocation of
Education Expenditure (No. 5706). Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA)
Bandura, A (1994) ‘Self-Efficacy’, in V.S. Ramachaudran (ed.) Encyclopedia of Human Behavior, New York:
Academic Press (reprinted in H. Friedman (ed.) (1998) Encyclopedia of Mental Health, San Diego:
Academic Press)
Bandura, A (1993) ‘Perceived Self-Efficacy in Cognitive Development and Functioning’, Educational
Psychologist 28.2: 117–48
Bernard, T, Dercon,S. and Taffesse, A.S. (2011), “Beyond fatalism: an empirical exploration of self-efficacy
and aspirations failure in Ethiopia”, CSAE working paper series WPS 2011/03
Camfield, L., Streuli, N. and Woodhead, M. (2008) Children’s Well-being in Contexts of Poverty: Approaches
to Research, Monitoring and Participation, Technical Note 12, Oxford: Young Lives
Cueto, S., Leon, J., Guerrero, G. and Muñoz, I. (2009) Psychometric Characteristics of Cognitive Development
and Achievement Instruments in Round 2 of Young Lives, Technical Note 15, Oxford: Young Lives
Cunha, F. and Heckman,J. (2008) ‘Formulating, Identifying and Estimating the Technology of Cognitive and
Non-cognitive Skill Formation’, Journal of Human Resources 43.4: 738–82
Cunha, F., Heckman,J. and Schennach,S.M. (2010) ‘Estimating the Technology of Cognitive and Non-cognitive
Skill Formation’, Econometrica 8.3: 883–931
Dercon, S. and Krishnan,P. (2009) ‘Poverty and the Psychosocial Competencies of Children: Evidence from the
Young Lives Sample in Four Developing Countries’, Children, Youth and Environments 19.2: 138–63
30

Escobal, J. and Flores,E. (2008) An Assessment of the Young Lives Sampling Approach in Peru, Technical Note
3, Oxford: Young Lives
Glewwe, P., Jacoby,H.G. and King, E.M. (2001) ‘Early Childhood Nutrition and Academic Achievement: A
Longitudinal Analysis’, Journal of Public Economics 81.3: 345–68
Glewwe, P. and King, E. (2001) ‘The Impact of Early Childhood Nutritional Status on Cognitive Development:
Does the Timing of Malnutrition Matter?’, World Bank Economic Review 15.1: 81–113
Grant, M. J., & Behrman, J. R. (2010).’ Gender gaps in educational attainment in less developed
countries’. Population and Development Review, 36(1), 71-89.
Helmers, C., & Patnam, M. (2011). The formation and evolution of childhood skill acquisition: Evidence from
India. Journal of Development Economics,95(2), 252-266.
Kingdon, G. (2005) ‘Where Has All the Bias Gone? Detecting Gender Bias in the Household Allocation of
Educational Expenditure in India’, Economic Development and Cultural Change 53.2: 409–52
Krishnan, P. and Krutikova,S. (2010) Skill Formation in Bombay’s Slums, Cambridge Working Papers in
Economics 1010, Cambridge: Faculty of Economics, University of Cambridge
Kumra, N. (2008) An Assessment of the Young Lives Sampling Approach in Andhra Pradesh, India, Technical
Note 2, Oxford: Young Lives
Levine, R., Lloyd, C., Greene, M., & Grown, C. (2008). Girls Count: A global investment & Action Agenda.
Center for Global Development.
Maitra, P., Pal, S., & Sharma, A. (2011). Reforms, Growth and Persistence of Gender Gap: Recent Evidence
from Private School Enrolment in India. IZA Discussion Papers.
Marcoux, A. (2002). Sex differentials in undernutrition: A look at survey evidence. Population and
Development Review, 28(2), 275-284.

31

Miller, N. E. and Dollard, John (1941) Social Learning and Imitation, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press
Nguyen, N. P. (2008) An Assessment of the Young Lives Sampling Approach in Vietnam, Technical Note 4,
Oxford: Young Lives
Outes-Leon, I. and Sanchez,A. (2008) An Assessment of the Young Lives Sampling Approach in Ethiopia,
Technical Note 1, Oxford: Young Lives
Outes-Leon, I., Sanchez, A. and Molinas, O. (2010) Psychosocial Status and Cognitive Achievement in Peru,
Working Paper 65, Oxford: Young Lives
Outes-Leon, I. and Dercon, S. (2008) Survey Attrition and Attrition Bias in Young Lives, Technical Note 5,
Oxford: Young Lives
Pells, K. (2011, in press) Delivering for Poor Girls: Inequalities and Children’s Life Chances, Policy Paper 3,
Oxford: Young Lives
Rosenberg, M. (1965) Society and the Adolescent Self-Image, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press
Rotter, J.B. (1966) ‘Generalized Expectancies for Internal Versus External Control of Reinforcements’,
Psychological Monographs 80: 1–28
Saha, L. J. (1997) ‘Aspirations and Expectations of Students’, in L.J. Saha (ed.) International Encyclopedia of
the Sociology of Education, Oxford: Pergamon
Sanchez, A. (2009) Early Nutrition and Cognitive Achievement in Pre-school Children in Peru, Working Paper
57, Oxford: Young Lives
Sen, A.K. (1992) Inequality Reexamined, Harvard: Harvard University Press
Streuli, N., Vennam,U. and Woodhead,M. (2011) Increasing Choice or Inequality? Pathways through Early
Education in Andhra Pradesh, India, Working Papers in Early Child Development 58, The Hague:
Bernard van Leer Foundation
32

Svedberg, P. (1990). ‘Undernutrition in Sub‐Saharan Africa: Is there a gender bias?’. The Journal of Development
Studies, 26(3), 469-486.

United Nations (2011) ‘Millennium Development Goals Report 2011 Statistical Annex’,
http://mdgs.un.org/unsd/mdg/Resources/Static/Data/2011%20Stat%20Annex.pdf (accessed 17 October
2011)

33

Table 1. Mean of outcome variables, by gender and cohort
Ethiopia
Female Male
Younger Cohort (2009), 8-year old

India
Female Male

Peru
Female Male

Vietnam
Female Male

Caregiver aspirations
Subjective Wellbeing
Trust Index
Pride Index
Agency Index
Height-for-age z score
BMI-for-age z score
Weight-for-age z score
PPVT score
Math score
Enrolled in school

14.3
6.13
0.02
-0.03
0.01
-1.28***
-1.27
-1.68***
80.2
2.31
0.75*

12.29
5.46
-0.01
-0.05
-0.04
-1.36
-1.35
-1.77
55.01
5.6
0.99

13.68***
6.15**
0.01
0.04***
0.03***
-1.49**
-1.48
-1.97***
61.6***
5.64
0.99

7.77
7.96
0.05
0
0.01
-1.15
0.39
-0.38
58.5
7.47
0.99

7.4*
8
0.04
-0.01
-0.01
-1.18
0.65***
-0.29
60.08*
7.91**
0.99

14.31
6.65
-0.02
0.03
0.02
-1.06
-0.75
-1.15
92.55
11.81
0.99

14.16*
7.25
0.02
-0.03**
-0.03**
-1.13
-0.58**
-1.12
93.63
11.71
0.98

Male
13.93
14.21
4.23
0.01
-0.02
-0.05**
-1.47*
-1.61
76.32
5.02
0.97

Female
13.47
12.14
3.61
0
-0.02
-0.01
0.06
-1.77
0.57
88.93
5.64
0.89

Male
14.03***
13.33***
3.68
-0.01
0.02
0
-0.08*
-1.51**
-0.01
91.69*
5.85
0.91

Female
15.41
15.42
6.33
-0.07
-0.03
0.03
0.05
-1.51
0.25
71.02
5.64
0.99

Male
15.42
15.52
5.68***
0.06***
0.02
-0.03
-0.05**
-1.55
0.31
73.54*
5.85
0.99

Female
14.22
13.99
4.82
-0.07
0
0.02
-0.01
-1.4
-0.95
137.47
7.49
0.97

Male
13.92**
13.85
4.77
0.08***
-0.01
-0.04
0.01
-1.53*
-1.08*
137.64
7.38
0.97

Male
14.04*
4.78
0.09***
-0.01
0.03*
0.02
-1.74***
-2.07***
154.11**
4.85***
0.88*

Female
13.17
4.91
-0.02
0.06
-0.05
0
-1.7
-0.92
121.76
5.77
0.74

Male
13.63**
4.62**
0.02
-0.08
0.06***
-0.02
-1.63
-1.62***
138.15***
7.28***
0.81**

Female
15.59
6.84
-0.09
0
0.1
0.03
-1.59
0.42
95.38
9.99
0.95

Male
15.7
6.63
0.08***
-0.01
-0.08***
-0.01
-1.38***
0.12***
97.99*
9.75
0.91*

Female
14.14
5.43
-0.1
-0.01
-0.01
0.04
-1.39
-0.69
165.39
13.01
0.81

Male
13.58***
5.36
0.1***
0.01
0.01
-0.04
-1.47
-1.02***
162.17
11.76***
0.73***

14.21
5.61
0
-0.02
-0.03
-1.13
-1.29
-1.57
79
2.09
0.79

Older Cohort (2006), 12-year old
Female
Child aspirations
13.9
Caregiver aspirations
14.08
Subjective Wellbeing
4.29
Trust Index
-0.01
Pride Index
0.04
Agency Index
0.01
Inclusion index
0.04
Height-for-age z score -1.31
BMI-for-age z score
-1.66
PPVT score
75.39
Math score
4.77
Enrolled in school
0.98
Older Cohort (2009), 15-year old
Female
Child aspirations
13.76
Subjective Wellbeing
4.78
Trust Index
-0.1
Pride Index
-0.03
Agency Index
-0.03
Inclusion index
-0.03
Height-for-age z score -0.99
BMI-for-age z score
-1.35
PPVT score
149.45
Math score
3.89
Enrolled in school
0.92

34

Table 2. Coefficient on male dummy variable
Educational and cognitive
achievement

Educational
Aspirations

PPVT

Maths
score

Enrolment

YC (2009) aged 8

-0.268

0.145

-0.0508*

OC (2006) aged 12

1.369

0.295

-0.0127

0.0590

5.084**

1.051***

-0.0354

0.338

YC (2009) aged 8

6.248***

0.0385

0.00394

OC (2006) aged 12

3.243***

0.254

0.0217

0.635***

OC (2009) age 15

16.02***

1.531***

0.0673**

0.506***

YC (2009) aged 8

1.508*

0.390*

0.00221

OC (2006) aged 12

1.844

0.169

-0.00504

-0.0628

OC (2009) age 15

1.729

-0.363

-0.0332**

0.0652

YC (2009) aged 8

1.004

-0.0842

-0.00716**

OC (2006) aged 12

0.718

-0.0966

0.00356

Child

Subjective
wellbeing

Psychosocial competencies

Ladder of
life

Trust

Pride

0.0635

0.488

0.00906

-0.0206

0.140

-0.0746

0.0147

-0.0351

Caregiver

Nutrition

Inclusion

Agency

Heightfor-age

BMI-forage

Weightfor-age

0.0280

-0.170***

0.0219

-0.124**

-0.0797

-0.0704

-0.0180

-0.143*

0.0654

0.175***

0.0195

0.0430

0.0629

-0.769***

-0.704***

0.702

0.0154

0.0843**

0.0650

-0.136**

-0.130***

Ethiopia

OC (2009) age 15
India

1.398***
1.184***

0.0898

0.0104

0.0439

-0.128***

0.0261

0.259*

-0.632

-0.245**

0.0332

-0.129***

-0.0180

0.105***

0.0748

-0.703***

-0.341

0.0253

-0.00777

-0.0116

-0.0186

-0.0437

0.260***

0.0466

-0.649***

0.145***

0.0357

-0.101***

-0.0811*

-0.0580

0.0640

-0.199

0.174***

-0.0231

-0.0429

-0.192***

0.191**

-0.289***

-0.157**

0.535

0.0304

-0.0605**

-0.0532**

-0.0679

0.147*

-0.104

-0.00288

0.161***

-0.00508

-0.0659**

-0.126**

-0.137*

-0.200***

Peru
0.0781

Vietnam
-0.275**

OC (2009) age 15
Note:

0.0152

0.0249

-2.791
-1.338*** -0.0781***
-0.527***
-0.0330
0.193***
0.0250
-0.0683
0.00986
-0.0852
-0.349***
1) Standard errors were clustered at site level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
2) Coefficients on mother’s education, log of monthly per capita expenditure, household size and dummy variables for ethnic/caste groups and urban areas are not reported owing to space constraints

35

Table 3A. Coefficient on male dummy and interaction term with urban location, Ethiopia and India
Educational and cognitive
achievement
Country/Cohort

Variables

PPVT

Maths
score

Enrolment

-2.081

0.0756

(-0.886)

(0.720)

Educational
Aspirations

Subjective
wellbeing

Psychosocial competencies

Caregiver

Ladder of
life

Trust

Pride

-0.0520

0.0981

0.507

0.0147

(-1.322)

(0.991)

(0.808)

(0.357)

Child

Nutrition
Agency

Heightfor-age

BMI-forage

Weightfor-age

-0.0440

0.0119

-0.146*

0.0365

-0.1000

(-0.867)

(0.471)

(-1.955)

(0.808)

(-1.548)

Inclusion

Ethiopia
YC(2009) aged 8

Male

Male*Urban

OC(2006) aged 12

Male

Male*Urban

OC(2009) aged 15

Male

Male*Urban

4.615

0.178

0.00303

-0.0880

-0.0493

-0.0143

0.0594

0.0410

-0.0610

-0.0372

-0.0609

(1.281)

(0.574)

(0.0638)

(-0.587)

(-0.0599)

(-0.226)

(0.973)

(0.952)

(-0.666)

(-0.411)

(-0.612)

1.946

0.263

-0.0158

0.0503

0.181

-0.0844

0.0194

-0.0665

-0.0148

-0.0466

-0.210**

0.101

(1.048)

(1.387)

(-1.163)

(0.296)

(1.358)

(-0.591)

(0.382)

(-1.561)

(-0.294)

(-1.115)

(-2.105)

(1.116)

-1.452

0.0786

0.00765

0.0214

-0.102

0.0249

-0.0119

-0.0334

-0.141*

0.0721

0.169

-0.0889

(-0.493)

(0.264)

(0.358)

(0.0806)

(-0.483)

(0.110)

(-0.148)

(-0.493)

(-1.760)

(1.087)

(1.069)

(-0.621)

6.596**

0.970***

-0.0404

0.482

-0.0729

0.121***

0.0725

0.0505

0.0506

-0.994***

-0.726***

(2.550)

(4.579)

(-1.181)

(1.526)

(-0.430)

(2.960)

(1.185)

(0.695)

(0.790)

(-7.785)

(-10.76)

-3.704

0.199

0.0124

-0.351

0.0927

0.132*

-0.130

-0.0182

0.0301

0.553***

0.0536

(-0.820)

(0.404)

(0.334)

(-0.923)

(0.368)

(1.798)

(-1.302)

(-0.163)

(0.308)

(3.505)

(0.482)

5.871***

0.108

0.00389

1.557***

0.807

0.00851

0.0588

0.0596

-0.176***

-0.138**

-0.236***

(2.979)

(0.497)

(0.686)

(5.689)

(1.563)

(0.202)

(1.434)

(1.169)

(-2.894)

(-2.813)

(-6.819)

India
YC(2009) aged 8

Male

Male*Urban

OC(2006) aged 12

Male

Male*Urban

OC(2009) aged 15

Male

Male*Urban

Note:

1.504

-0.278

0.000205

-0.639

-0.422

0.0277

0.102

0.0215

0.161

0.0354

0.143

(0.401)

(-0.594)

(0.0285)

(-1.599)

(-0.583)

(0.286)

(1.399)

(0.244)

(1.391)

(0.275)

(1.208)

3.801**

0.333**

0.0294

0.782***

1.440***

0.114

0.0269

0.0519

-0.142***

0.0541

0.328**

-0.598

(2.183)

(2.053)

(1.295)

(4.863)

(6.287)

(0.988)

(0.550)

(1.233)

(-3.079)

(1.265)

(2.572)

(-0.311)

-2.190

-0.306

-0.0298

-0.534*

-0.997**

-0.0929

-0.0640

-0.0310

0.0544

-0.109

-0.270

-0.135

(-2.200)

(-0.633)

(-0.957)

(-0.667)

(-1.739)

(-0.408)

(-0.663)

(-0.372)

(0.598)

(-1.287)

(-1.064)

(-0.035)

17.06***

1.833***

0.0821***

0.543**

-0.136

0.0497

-0.143***

-0.0276

0.0598

0.0220

-0.727***

(6.063)

(5.520)

(2.674)

(2.398)

(-1.015)

(0.886)

(-2.962)

(-0.502)

(1.458)

(0.291)

(-8.192)

-3.998

-1.168*

-0.0573

-0.147

-0.422

-0.0637

0.0545

0.0373

0.175**

0.205

0.0945

(-0.719)

(-1.777)

(-0.944)

(-0.326)

(-1.593)

(-0.574)

(0.571)

(0.343)

(2.161)

(1.366)

(0.537)

1) Standard errors were clustered at site level. Robust t-statistics in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
2) Coefficients on mother’s education, log of monthly per capita expenditure, household size and dummy variables for ethnic/caste groups and urban areas are not reported owing to space constraints

36

Table 3B. Coefficient on male dummy and interaction term with urban location, Peru and Vietnam
Educational and cognitive
achievement
Country/Cohort

Variables

PPVT

Maths
score

Enrolment

Educational
Aspirations
Child

Subjective
wellbeing

Caregiver

Ladder of life

Psychosocial competencies
Trust

Pride

Inclusion

Nutrition

Agency

Heightfor-age

BMI-forage

Weightfor-age

Peru
YC(2009) aged 8

Male

Male*Urban
OC(2006) aged
12

Male

Male*Urban
OC(2009) aged
15

Male

Male*Urban

1.446

0.219

0.000148

-0.563*

-0.0549

0.0338

-0.00973

0.0157

-0.0728

0.145*

-0.0541

(0.76)

(0.388)

(0.0265)

(-1.890)

(-0.136)

(1.125)

(-0.161)

(0.513)

(-1.027)

(2.058)

(-0.69)

0.0855

0.238

0.00286

0.307

0.111

-0.0577

-0.00266

-0.0475

0.0404

0.161

0.184*

(0.043)

(0.394)

(0.479)

(0.752)

(0.181)

(-1.221)

(-0.039)

(-1.155)

(0.489)

(1.486)

(1.828)

3.687**

0.228

-0.00721

0.207

0.318*

-0.537**

0.122*

0.103*

-0.100

-0.00135

-0.0359

0.0690

(2.134)

(1.181)

(-0.620)

(1.054)

(1.743)

(-2.208)

(1.674)

(1.776)

(-1.594)

(-0.0198)

(-0.281)

(0.580)

-3.025

-0.0959

0.00356

-0.444*

-0.447*

-0.185

0.0367

-0.111

-0.00129

-0.131

-0.0363

-0.00828

(-1.364)

(-0.388)

(0.238)

(-1.757)

(-1.905)

(-0.593)

(0.392)

(-1.483)

(-0.0160)

(-1.493)

(-0.221)

(-0.054)

1.914

-0.539

-0.0444

0.789

-0.199

0.193**

0.0877

0.00357

-0.170***

-0.00097

-0.315***

(0.729)

(-1.032)

(-1.372)

(1.347)

(-0.171)

(2.266)

(0.824)

(0.0570)

(-3.565)

(-0.0064)

(-2.887)

-0.303

0.290

0.0184

-1.190*

-0.000203

-0.0314

-0.182

-0.0762

-0.0364

0.316*

0.0420

(-0.101)

(0.460)

(0.473)

(-2.070)

(-0.000174)

(-0.309)

(-1.609)

(-1.213)

(-0.514)

(1.798)

(0.318)

Vietnam
YC(2009) aged 8

Male

Male*Urban
OC(2006) aged
12

Male

Male*Urban
OC(2009) aged
15

Male

Male*Urban

Note:

1.169

-0.0590

-0.00668*

-0.215**

0.516

0.0284

-0.067**

-0.064***

-0.081**

0.0630

-0.049

(0.931)

(-0.383)

(-1.821)

(-2.711)

(1.497)

(1.062)

(-2.327)

(-3.380)

(-2.166)

(0.891)

(-0.87)

-0.803

-0.122

-0.00234

0.281**

0.0916

0.00936

0.0312

0.0533

0.0613

0.407***

0.36**

(-0.363)

(-0.588)

(-0.415)

(2.662)

(0.104)

(0.129)

(0.655)

(0.711)

(0.406)

(3.496)

(2.435)

0.918

-0.122

0.00536

-0.299**

-0.0888

-0.0516

0.155***

0.0213

0.0395

-0.0810*

-0.141**

-0.0464

(0.633)

(-1.062)

(0.443)

(-2.522)

(-0.692)

(-0.466)

(3.460)

(0.526)

(0.931)

(-1.938)

(-1.987)

(-0.608)

-0.944

0.120

-0.00866

0.112

-0.0723

0.235

0.0279

-0.127

-0.117

0.0724

0.0735

-0.435***

(-0.301)

(0.479)

(-0.327)

(0.439)

(-0.258)

(0.967)

(0.284)

(-1.432)

(-1.259)

(0.792)

(0.472)

(-2.606)

-1.257

-1.22***

-0.0846***

-0.55***

-0.0403

0.193***

0.0354

-0.0630

0.00871

-0.145*

-0.336***

(-0.455)

(-3.800)

(-3.491)

(-3.227)

(-0.109)

(3.521)

(1.155)

(-0.980)

(0.210)

(-1.897)

(-3.640)

-7.544*

-0.597

0.0315

0.0937

0.0354

-0.00011

-0.0505

-0.0261

0.00561

0.294*

-0.0653

(-1.761)

(-0.586)

(0.599)

(0.408)

(0.0991)

(-0.0016)

(-1.416)

(-0.340)

(0.0889)

(1.745)

(-0.334)

1) Standard errors were clustered at site level. Robust t-statistics in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

37

2) Coefficients on mother’s education, log of monthly per capita expenditure, household size and dummy variables for ethnic/caste groups and urban areas are not reported owing to space constraints

Table 4A. Coefficient on male dummy and interaction term with mother’s education: Ethiopia and India
Educational and cognitive
achievement
Country/Cohort
Ethiopia
YC(2009) aged
8

OC(2006)
aged 12

OC(2009)
aged 15

India
YC(2009) aged
8

OC(2006)
aged 12

PPVT

Maths
score

Enrolment

Male
Male*Mother's
Education

-2.157

0.0819

-0.0597

0.611

0.0205

0.00287

Male
Male*Mother's
Education

1.563

0.500***

-0.0226*

-0.0684

-0.0715*

Male
Male*Mother's
Education

7.966***

Educational
Aspirations

Subjective
wellbeing

Caregiver

Ladder of
life

Trust

Pride

0.0763
0.00413

0.402

0.0078

0.0278

0.0163

0.0634

0.00347

0.0148

0.0270

1.315***

-0.038

-1.022**

-0.0936

Male
Male*Mother's
Education

5.95***

0.344

0.0817

-0.0839*

Male
Male*Mother's
Education

4.173**

0.297*

-0.329

-0.0152

Variables

Nutrition

Agency

Heightfor-age

BMI-forage

Weightfor-age

-0.0272

0.0412

-0.221***

0.0334

-0.154**

0.0004

0.00211

-0.0042

0.0169

-0.00376

0.00990

-0.105

0.0127

-0.091**

-0.0527

-0.0463

-0.233**

0.127

0.0109

0.0007

0.00402

-0.00631

0.0100

0.0323

-0.0221

0.529*

-0.135

0.18***

0.0157

0.0707

-0.887***

-0.667***

0.00096

-0.067

0.0356

-0.001

0.00134

-0.00979

0.0781
0.00539

0.0419

-0.0134

0.00661
0.00073

1.65***

0.979

0.0400

0.0682

-0.140**

-0.125*

-0.203***

-0.07**

-0.0761

-0.00674

0.0600
0.0066
7

-0.00089

0.00106

-0.0013

0.00077

0.0388
0.00602

0.8***

1.603***
0.145***

0.103

0.0901**

-0.107**

0.0861*

0.368***

-2.011

-0.0164*

-0.0073

-0.021**

-0.0385

0.491

Child

-0.06*

OC(2009)
aged 15

Note:

Psychosocial competencies

-0.00475

0.0391
0.0102
0.0023
5

Inclusion

0.0914**
Male
19.6***
1.95***
*
0.50**
-0.179
-0.0756
-0.0646
0.0337
0.0790
-0.72***
Male*Mother's
0.0253*
Education
-1.27**
-0.15**
0.00851
0.0013
-0.0234
0.0126 -0.0188*
0.0165
**
-0.00149
0.0055
1) Standard errors were clustered at site level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
2) Coefficients on mother’s education, log of monthly per capita expenditure, household size and dummy variables for ethnic/caste groups and urban areas are not reported owing to space constraints

38

Table 4B: Coefficient on male dummy and interaction term with mother’s education: Peru and Vietnam
Educational and cognitive
achievement
Country/Cohort

Variables

PPVT

Maths
score

Enrolment

Male
Male*Mother's
Education

2.995*

0.842**

-0.186

Male
Male*Mother's
Education
Male
Male*Mother's
Education

Educational
Aspirations

Subjective wellbeing

Caregiver

Ladder
of life

Trust

Pride

0.0120

0.211

-0.412

-0.0642

-0.0571

-0.00123

-0.0696

0.0552

4.524**

0.551**

-0.00442

0.177

0.327

-0.358

-0.0505*

-.00008

-0.0318

-0.0374

4.230

-0.259

-0.0177

-0.331

-0.0139

1.896

Psychosocial
competencies

Nutrition

Agency

Heightfor-age

BMI-forage

Weightfor-age

0.0152

-0.00102

-0.0226

0.105

-0.0614

0.00712

-0.00338

-0.00221

-0.00266

0.0196

0.0176

-0.538*

0.183**

0.0574

-0.0669

-0.0370

-0.0868

-0.00975

-0.0149

-0.00508

-0.00289

-0.00457

-0.00588

0.00385

0.00984

0.904

0.603

0.107

0.118

0.00937

-0.106

-0.418**

-0.00205

-0.111*

-0.107

0.00888

-0.0188

-0.00692

-0.195**
0.00043
3

0.0394**

0.0171

-0.288

-0.0179

-0.342**

-0.0491

-0.0142

-0.152***

-0.124**

-0.166*

-0.0970

-0.238**

-0.130

0.0297

0.00157

0.0269

0.0852

0.00650

0.0133*

0.0103

0.0142

0.0355**

0.0384**

0.490

-0.226

0.00831

-0.320

-0.128

0.102

0.128

-0.0243

-0.0924

-0.0524

-0.317**

-0.341**

0.0329

0.0190

-0.0007

0.00644

0.00352

-0.0154

0.00486

0.00282

0.0158

-0.00198

0.0279*

0.0299*

Child

Inclusion

Peru
YC(2009) aged 8

OC(2006) aged
12

OC(2009) aged
15

Vietnam
YC(2009) aged 8

OC(2006) aged
12

Male
Male*Mother's
Education
Male
Male*Mother's
Education

OC(2009) aged
15

Note:

Male
-2.020
-2.137*** -0.121**
-0.568
-0.0840
0.189
-0.0256
-0.232
-0.0288
-0.39***
-0.586***
Male*Mother's
0.00061
0.0451**
Education
-0.114
0.118*
0.00632
0.00600
0.00752
0
0.00747
0.0242
0.00571
*
0.0350**
1) Standard errors were clustered at site level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
2) Coefficients on mother’s education, log of monthly per capita expenditure, household size and dummy variables for ethnic/caste groups and urban areas are not reported owing to space constraints

39

Table 5A: Coefficient on male dummy and interaction term with poorest tercile of consumption expenditure: Ethiopia and India
Educational and cognitive
achievement
Country/Cohort

Variables

PPVT

Maths
score

Enrolment

-1.201

0.183

(-0.477)

(0.981)

Educational
Aspirations

Subjective
wellbeing

Psychosocial competencies

Caregiver

Ladder of
life

Trust

Pride

-0.062**

0.0161

0.483

0.0219

(-2.282)

(0.185)

(0.978)

(0.638)

Child

Nutrition

Agency

Heightfor-age

BMI-forage

Weightfor-age

-0.0169

0.0170

-0.18***

0.0856

-0.0799

(-0.483)

(0.623)

(-3.008)

(1.358)

(-1.276)

Inclusion

Ethiopia
YC(2009) aged 8

Male
Male*Poorest Tercile

OC(2006) aged 12

Male
Male*Poorest Tercile

OC(2009) aged 15

Male
Male*Poorest Tercile

2.317

-0.119

0.0314

0.127

0.0584

-0.0395

-0.0113

0.0396

0.0218

-0.188

-0.134

(0.604)

(-0.675)

(0.874)

(0.723)

(0.103)

(-0.729)

(-0.204)

(1.338)

(0.206)

(-1.584)

(-1.214)

0.231

0.288

-0.0189

0.128

0.104

0.00636

0.0479

-0.0991*

-0.0527

0.0376

-0.117

0.0332

(0.106)

(1.400)

(-1.135)

(0.805)

(0.569)

(0.0414)

(0.893)

(-1.916)

(-1.259)

(0.908)

(-0.99)

(0.500)

3.231

0.00374

0.0191

-0.214

0.113

-0.233

-0.0893

0.0604

-0.0428

-0.164**

-0.0847

0.0945

(1.367)

(0.0122)

(0.786)

(-0.697)

(0.590)

(-0.879)

(-0.914)

(0.959)

(-0.567)

(-2.125)

(-0.476)

(0.541)

5.582**

1.053**

0.00191

0.228

-0.0850

0.189***

-0.00921

0.0431

0.0814

-0.69***

-0.76***

(2.677)

(2.743)

(0.0869)

(1.524)

(-0.611)

(4.154)

(-0.153)

(0.697)

(1.554)

(-5.70)

(-11.28)

-2.450

-0.0844

-0.12***

0.294

0.0879

-0.0440

0.0671

-0.0039

-0.0559

-0.241

0.140

(-0.546)

(-0.170)

(-3.536)

(0.824)

(0.412)

(-0.757)

(0.611)

(-0.045)

(-0.845)

(-1.296)

(1.096)

8.085***

0.217

0.00759

1.381***

0.737

0.0389

0.131***

0.0654

-0.128

-0.136**

-0.194***

(3.615)

(0.756)

(1.392)

(6.047)

(1.486)

(0.881)

(4.018)

(1.431)

(-1.576)

(-2.629)

(-3.448)

India
YC(2009) aged 8

Male
Male*Poorest Tercile

OC(2006) aged 12

Male
Male*Poorest Tercile

OC(2009) aged 15

Male
Male*Poorest Tercile

Note:

-5.482

-0.518

-0.0107

0.0548

-0.128

-0.0698

-0.142**

0.00060

-0.0228

0.0178

-0.0200

(-1.470)

(-0.877)

(-1.079)

(0.151)

(-0.246)

(-0.760)

(-2.496)

(0.0093)

(-0.159)

(0.198)

(-0.203)

3.208*

0.509***

0.0593**

0.640***

1.351***

0.169

0.00405

0.109**

-0.118**

0.0433

0.337**

-2.124

(1.737)

(2.990)

(2.490)

(3.865)

(5.585)

(1.385)

(0.0785)

(2.462)

(-2.420)

(0.959)

(2.499)

(-1.049)

-0.0346

-0.789***

-0.117***

-0.0607

-0.600

-0.278

0.0246

-0.198***

-0.0297

-0.0527

-0.232

4.254

(-1.422)

(-0.0109)

(-2.672)

(-2.825)

(-0.205)

(-1.321)

(0.276)

(-2.583)

(-0.352)

(-0.674)

(-0.994)

(1.210)

16.93***

1.580***

0.110***

0.563**

-0.216

0.0485

-0.0793

-0.0226

0.111**

0.0947

-0.737***

(5.730)

(4.519)

(3.421)

(2.365)

(-1.532)

(0.822)

(-1.572)

(-0.391)

(2.576)

(1.188)

(-7.907)

-2.610

-0.217

-0.126**

-0.173

-0.139

-0.0367

-0.160*

0.0205

-0.0210

-0.0979

0.103

(-0.509)
(-0.357)
(-2.253)
(-0.418)
(-0.567)
(-0.359)
(-1.825)
(0.204)
(-0.281) (-0.708)
(0.636)
1) Standard errors were clustered at site level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
2) Coefficients on mother’s education, log of monthly per capita expenditure, household size and dummy variables for ethnic/caste groups and urban areas are not reported owing to space constraints

40

Table 5B: Coefficient on male dummy and interaction term with poorest tercile of consumption expenditure: Peru and Vietnam
Educational and cognitive
achievement
Country/Cohort

Variables

PPVT

Maths
score

Enrolment

Educational
Aspirations
Child

Caregiver

Subjective
wellbeing
Ladder of
life

Psychosocial competencies
Trust

Pride

Inclusion

Nutrition
Agency

Heightfor-age

BMI-forage

Weightfor-age

Peru
YC(2009) aged 8

Male

1.100

0.161

-0.000760

-0.335

-0.133

0.0247

-0.0160

-0.0289

-0.0778

0.295***

0.0865

(1.23)

(0.583)

(-0.226)

(-1.322)

(-0.365)

(0.779)

(-0.572)

(-1.167)

(-1.516)

(3.850)

(1.207)

1.408

0.769**

0.00896

-0.0503

0.393

-0.107

0.0199

0.0353

0.119

-0.0787

0.00718

(1.06)

(2.125)

(0.924)

(-0.10)

(0.524)

(-1.671)

(0.526)

(0.871)

(1.379)

(-0.638)

(0.0608)

1.411

0.310**

0.00852

0.0363

0.112

-0.689***

0.153***

0.0453

-0.0705

-0.101**

-0.109

0.0328

(1.13)

(2.764)

(1.423)

(0.248)

(1.188)

(-3.822)

(3.354)

(0.858)

(-1.593)

(-2.310)

(-1.149)

(0.402)

1.433

-0.439

-0.0406**

-0.298

-0.181

0.156

-0.0270

-0.0257

-0.0906

0.0610

0.167

0.105

(0.56)

(-1.490)

(-2.800)

(-1.237)

(-0.563)

(0.473)

(-0.342)

(-0.349)

(-1.161)

(0.838)

(0.914)

(0.635)

Male

2.299*

-0.317

-0.0450**

-0.130

0.0718

0.18***

-0.0670

-0.0528

-0.193***

0.338***

-0.220**

(1.97)

(-0.93)

(-2.799)

(-0.423)

(0.163)

(3.095)

(-1.061)

(-1.124)

(-3.296)

(4.787)

(-2.311)

Male*Poorest Tercile

-1.022

-0.133

0.0363

0.414

-0.777

-0.0181

0.127

0.0190

0.0176

-0.45***

-0.228

(-0.53)

(-0.149)

(0.762)

(0.647)

(-0.693)

(-0.158)

(0.912)

(0.193)

(0.179)

(-3.105)

(-1.189)

Male

1.180

-0.297*

-0.00304

-0.131

0.384

0.0260

-0.0557*

-0.074**

0.0219

0.204**

(0.78)

(-1.95)

(-0.825)

(-1.64)

(1.111)

(0.606)

(-1.980)

(-2.503)

(0.462)

(2.094)

(1.688)

Male*Poorest Tercile

-0.396

0.631*

-0.0123

-0.0626

0.517

0.0121

-0.0027

0.0674

-0.260***

-0.152

-0.31***

(-0.13)

(1.960)

(-1.497)

(-0.36)

(0.468)

(0.149)

(-0.037)

(1.057)

(-3.385)

(-1.302)

(-3.131)

-0.282

-0.132

-0.00568

-0.189

-0.0684

0.00456

0.233***

-0.0469

-0.0742*

-0.0605

-0.120

(-0.20)

(-1.13)

(-1.216)

(-1.444)

(-0.53)

(0.0476)

(3.813)

(-1.144)

(0.644)

(-1.901)

(-0.911)

(-1.062)

2.378

0.0610

0.0250

-0.347

-0.214

-0.101

-0.211*

0.0985

-0.0657

0.00312

-0.228*

-0.0706

(0.79)

(0.320)

(0.932)

(-1.178)

(-0.809)

(-0.414)

(-1.997)

(1.282)

(-0.826)

(0.0406)

(-1.923)

(-0.421)

-2.328

-1.53***

-0.120***

-0.789***

-0.0728

0.169***

0.0211

-0.0543

0.0154

0.0163

-0.277**

(-0.8)

(-4.06)

(-4.187)

(-5.377)

(-0.194)

(3.616)

(0.717)

(-1.455)

(0.536)

(0.218)

(-2.532)

-1.576

0.550

0.128**

0.804**

0.0610

0.0722

0.0143

-0.0428

-0.0174

-0.310**

-0.229*

(-0.47)

(0.762)

(2.790)

(2.544)

(0.198)

(0.896)

(0.182)

(-0.319)

(-0.228)

(-2.269)

(-1.733)

Male*Poorest Tercile

OC(2006) aged 12

Male

Male*Poorest Tercile

OC(2009) aged 15

Vietnam
YC(2009) aged 8

OC(2006) aged 12

Male

Male*Poorest Tercile

OC(2009) aged 15

Male

Male*Poorest Tercile

Note:

0.0360

0.136

1) Standard errors were clustered at site level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
2) Coefficients on mother’s education, log of monthly per capita expenditure, household size and dummy variables for ethnic/caste groups and urban areas are not reported owing to space constraints

41

Table 6: Transmission of gender bias over time: Persistence coefficients from regression of outcomes at 15 years on variables at 12 years of age
Dependent variable

Regressors

Child Aspirations (2009)

Male
Caregiver aspirations (2006)
Male
Subjective wellbeing (2006)
Male
Trust index (2006)
Male
Pride index (2006)
Male
Inclusion index (2006)
Male
Agency index (2006)
Male
Child aspirations (2006)
Male
Child aspirations (2006)
Male
Child aspirations (2006)
Male
Caregiver aspirations (2006)
Male
Child aspirations (2009)

Subjective well-being
(2009)
Trust Index (2009)
Pride index (2009)
Inclusion index (2009)
Agency index (2009)
PPVT raw score (2009)
Math score (2009)
Agency index (2009)
Agency index (2009)
Enrolment(2009)
Note:

Ethiopia

India

Peru

Vietnam

0.330*
0.0838

0.104
0.355***

0.0672
0.396***

-0.487***
0.366***

-0.0149
0.141***
0.173***
0.107***
0.0277
0.0929**
0.0458
0.0317
0.0627
-0.0237
4.874**
1.947***
1.044***
0.284***
-0.0422
0.0382***
0.0735
-0.00062
-0.04*
0.04***

-0.265*
0.133***
0.0297
0.0824**
-0.130
0.0242
-0.00354
0.0607
0.103
0.0130
12.64***
2.785***
1.289***
0.381***
-0.0180
0.0624***
0.0520
0.0352***
0.04
0.074***

0.0424
-0.0564
0.151***
0.176***
-0.0266
0.139***
-0.0491
-0.0979
-0.183***
0.0528
2.207*
1.810***
-0.330
0.376***
-0.0422
0.0488**
-0.191***
0.0286*
-0.0144
0.0712***

-0.0325
0.105***
0.185***
0.0357
0.0227
-0.0289
-0.0668
-0.0124
0.000258
-0.0118
-1.793
4.017***
-1.145***
0.842***
-0.0615*
0.0696***
0.00504
-0.0314**
-0.04*
0.077***

1) Standard errors were clustered at site level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
2) Coefficients on mother’s education, log of monthly per capita expenditure, household size and dummy variables for ethnic/caste groups and urban areas are not reported owing to space constraints

42

Table 7: Household fixed effects regressions – Younger cohort (2009)

Weight-for-age z score
Male
Observations
Number of households
Height-for-age z score
Male
Observations
Number of households
BMI-for-age z score
Male
Observations
Number of households
Enrolment

Male
Observations
Number of households
PPVT
Male
Observations
Number of households
Note:

(1)
Ethiopia

(2)
India

(3)
Peru

(4)
Vietnam

0.00779
(0.166)
2,934
1,883
Ethiopia

-0.0772
(-1.157)
2,515
1,928
India

0.147*
(2.022)
2,649
1,911
Peru

0.0105
(0.117)
2,401
1,936
Vietnam

-0.142**
(-2.405)
3,371
1,883
Ethiopia

0.0231
(0.344)
2,728
1,929
India

-0.0089
(-0.108)
2,638
1,911
Peru

-0.0187
(-0.363)
2,796
1,939
Vietnam

0.0434
(1.072)
3,368
1,883
Ethiopia

-0.128**
(-2.137)
2,725
1,929
India

0.286***
(4.966)
2,635
1,911
Peru

0.132
(1.668)
2,785
1,933
Vietnam

0.0469**
(-2.386)
2,258
1,262
Ethiopia

0.0230**
(2.338)
3,687
1,927
India

0.197
(0.708)
3,430
1,914
Peru

-0.0290
(-1.608)
3,102
1,948
Vietnam

1.690**
(2.397)
2,340
1,833

0.0132
(0.0129)
2,747
1,901

-1.178
(-1.268)
3,335
1,877

1) Standard errors were clustered at site level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
2) Coefficients on dummy variables for completed years of age are not reported owing to space constraints

43

Table 8: Comparing gender bias in 8-year olds in 2002 and 2009
2002
Girls Boys

2009
Girls Boys

Mean
S.D.
Mean
S.D.
Mean
S.D.
Mean
S.D.

-1.87
1.21
-1.41
1.25
-1.2
1.08
0.68
0.47

-2.11***
1.32
-1.55
1.31
-1.24
1.15
0.63*
0.48

-1.57
0.91
-1.14
1.03
-1.29
0.91
0.79
0.41

-1.68**
0.96
-1.28***
1.06
-1.26
0.99
0.75*
0.43

Mean
S.D.
Mean
S.D.
Mean
S.D.
Mean
S.D.

-1.86
0.96
-1.58
1.01
-1.27
0.91
0.97
0.17

-2.05***
1.11
-1.55
1.07
-1.53***
1.06
0.98
0.15

-1.77
1.03
-1.4
1.04
-1.3
1.04
0.99
0.11

-1.97***
1.08
-1.49*
1.03
-1.45***
1.08
0.99
0.09

Mean
S.D.
Mean
S.D.
Mean
S.D.
Mean
S.D.

-0.49
0.94
-1.37
0.96
0.42
0.86
0.99
0.08

-0.51
0.98
-1.45
1.05
0.57**
0.95
0.99
0.11

-0.38
1.14
-1.14
1.04
0.39
1.01
0.99
0.09

-0.3
1.24
-1.18
1.06
0.64***
1.09
0.99
0.09

Mean
S.D.
Mean
S.D.
Mean
S.D.
Mean
S.D.

-1.66
0.95
-1.41
0.97
-1.13
0.9
0.98
0.13

-1.76*
1.05
-1.52*
0.98
-1.12
1.03
0.99
0.12

-1.16
1.14
-1.06
1.02
-0.77
1.14
0.99
0.11

-1.12
1.41
-1.13
1.11
-0.58
1.4
0.98
0.14

Ethiopia
Weight-for-age z-score
Height-for-age z-score
BMI-for-age z-score
Enrolment

India
Weight-for-age z-score
Height-for-age z-score
BMI-for-age z-score
Enrolment

Peru
Weight-for-age z-score
Height-for-age z-score
BMI-for-age z-score
Enrolment

Vietnam
Weight-for-age z-score
Height-for-age z-score
BMI-for-age z-score
Enrolment

44

Appendix A. Indicators and definitions used
Indicator
Aspirations

Question/Definition

Child’s desired Q. Imagine you had no constraints and could study for as long as you liked,
education
or go back to school if you have already left. What level of formal education
would you like to complete?
[CODED AS YEARS OF EDUCATION; UNIVERSITY=15, ADULT LITERACY=5]
Parent’s desired Q. Ideally what level of education would you like [NAME] to complete?
education
[CODED AS YEARS OF EDUCATION; UNIVERSITY=15, ADULT LITERACY=5]
(asked of the main caregiver)
Subjective well-being
Ladder of life

Q. There are nine steps on this ladder. Suppose we say that the ninth step,
at the very top, represents the best possible life for you and the bottom
represents the worst possible life for you. Where on the ladder do you feel
you personally stand at the present time?
Psychosocial competencies
All psychosocial indices are produced through an identical procedure: (i) all relevant questions
are recoded to be positive outcomes, (ii) relevant questions are all normalized to z-scores
within each country (subtract mean and divide by SD) and then (iii) an average of the relevant zscores is taken across the non-missing values of the questions. The questions differed in
coverage a little across rounds and cohorts and thus the indices are calculated a little
differently. All the questions are on Likert-type scales going from 1 to 4 in Round 2 (R2) and
from 1 to 5 in Round 3 (R3). The exact questions used per index are given below. YC=Younger
Cohort; OC=Older Cohort.
Trust index
YC R3 (8 years):
Most people in my neighbourhood can be trusted.
I feel safe when I go out of the house on my own.
I believe the government does what is right for people like me.
OC R2 (12 years):
Most people in my neighbourhood are basically honest.
Most people in my neighbourhood can be trusted.
I believe the government does what is right for people like me.
I feel safe when I go out of the house on my own.
OC R3 (15 years):
Most people in my neighbourhood can be trusted.
I feel safe when I go out of the house on my own.
I believe the government does what is right for people like me.
Agency
index YC R3 (8 years):
[Self-efficacy
If I try hard, I can improve my situation in life.
scale]
Other people in my family make all the decisions about how I spend
my time [recoded to positive].
I like to make plans for my future studies and work.
45

If I study hard at school, I will be rewarded by a better job in the
future.
I have no choice about the work I do – I must do this sort of work
[recoded to positive].
OC R2 (12 years):
If I try hard, I can improve my situation in life
Other people in my family make all the decisions about how I spend
my time [recoded to positive].
I like to make plans for my future studies and work.
If I study hard at school, I will be rewarded by a better job in the
future.
I have no choice about the work I do – I must do this sort of work
[recoded to positive].
OC R3 (15 years):
If I try hard, I can improve my situation in life.
Other people in my family make all the decisions about how I spend
my time [recoded to positive].
I like to make plans for my future studies and work.
If I study hard at school, I will be rewarded by a better job in the
future.
I have choice about the work I do – I must do this sort of work.
Pride index [self- YC R3 (8 years):
esteem scale]
I am proud of my shoes or of having shoes.
I am proud of my clothes.
I am never embarrassed because I do not have the right books,
pencils or other equipment.
I am proud that I have the correct uniform.
I am proud of the work I have to do.
OC R2 (12 years):
I feel proud to show my friends or other visitors where I live.
I am ashamed of my clothes [recoded to positive].
I am ashamed of my shoes [88=no shoes] [recoded to positive].
I feel proud of the job my [INSERT RELATIONSHIP OF HOUSEHOLD
HEAD TO THE CHILD] does.
I am often embarrassed because I do not have the right books,
pencils and other equipment for school [recoded to positive].
I am worried that I don’t have the correct uniform [recoded to
positive].
I am proud of my achievements at school.
I am embarrassed by/ashamed of the work I have to do [recoded to
positive].
The job I do makes me feel proud .
OC R3 (15 years):
I am proud of my shoes or of having shoes.
I am proud of my clothes.
I am never embarrassed because I do not have the right books,
46

pencils or other equipment.
I am proud that I have the correct uniform.
I am proud of the work I have to do.
Inclusion
[discrimination]
index

OC R2 (12 years):
When I am at the shops/market I am usually treated by others with
fairness and with respect.
Adults in my [STREET/VILLAGE] treat me worse than other children
my age [recoded to positive].
The other children in my class treat me with respect.
Other pupils in my class tease me at school [recoded to positive].
My teachers treat me worse than other children [recoded to
positive].
OC R3 (15 years)
The other children in my class treat me with respect
Pupils in my class never tease me at school.
Adults in my community treat me as well as they treat other children
at my age.

Nutrition
Height-for-age z- Computed using WHO 2005 standards
scores
Weight-for-age
z-scores
BMI-for-age
scores

Computed using WHO 2005 standards

z- Computed using WHO 2005 standards

Education and cognitive achievement
PPVT raw score

Non-standardized raw score on the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test

Maths score

Score on standard maths computing questions (maximum score is 20)

Enrolment

Dummy variable equal to 1 if enrolled in formal schooling

47

Appendix B: Regressions on education and aspirations variables in Ethiopia for 15-year old children

VARIABLES
male
urban
Ethnicity dummies
mixed
other
agew
amhara
gurage
hadia
oromo
sidama
tigrian
wolayta

(1)

(2)

(3)

PPVT

Math

Enrolment

(4)
Child
Aspirations

5.084**
(2.814)
24.46***
(4.439)

1.051***
(4.184)
1.783***
(3.821)

-0.0354
(-1.521)
0.103***
(3.382)

0.338
(1.683)
0.776***
(3.129)

-17.80
(-1.167)
-19.49
(-1.173)
-12.87
(-0.937)
-19.54
(-1.250)
-21.45
(-1.214)
-26.58
(-1.701)
-16.59
(-1.085)
-11.13
(-0.712)
-3.331
(-0.184)
-10.52
(-0.740)

-0.569
(-0.246)
-0.0498
(-0.0229)
1.043
(0.342)
0.271
(0.125)
1.497
(0.649)
-1.519
(-0.694)
-0.494
(-0.225)
-1.203
(-0.555)
1.743
(0.778)
-0.443
(-0.196)

0.0192
(0.566)
-0.168
(-1.203)

1.845
(1.393)
1.353
(1.002)

0.877**
(2.569)
-0.421
(-0.839)
9.845***
(3.767)
100.9***
(4.635)

0.167***
(4.543)
0.0357
(0.500)
1.182***
(3.754)
-4.244
(-1.562)

-0.000932
(-0.0294)
0.0164
(0.581)
-0.0165
(-0.409)
0.0101
(0.361)
0.0475
(1.173)
0.00346
(0.0611)
-0.0380
(-1.132)
0.0493
(1.018)
0.00285
(0.956)
0.00917*
(1.765)
0.0336
(1.696)
0.622***
(4.812)

1.522
(1.200)
1.586
(1.221)
2.385*
(1.844)
1.128
(0.865)
-0.140
(-0.108)
1.889
(1.443)
1.858
(1.500)
1.837
(1.347)
0.0223
(1.635)
0.0809**
(2.469)
0.525***
(3.121)
8.470***
(4.541)

954
0.269

955
0.195

953
0.049

945
0.098

kambata
mother's education level
household size
Ln of household expenditure
Constant

Observations
R-squared
Robust t-statistics in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

48

