2008/ED/EFA/MRT/PI/18

Background paper prepared for the
Education for All Global Monitoring Report 2008

Education for All by 2015: will we make it?

Gender bias in textbooks:
a hidden obstacle on the road to gender
equality in education
Rae Lesser Blumberg
2007

This paper was commissioned by the Education for All Global Monitoring Report as background
information to assist in drafting the 2008 report. It has not been edited by the team. The views and
opinions expressed in this paper are those of the author(s) and should not be attributed to the EFA
Global Monitoring Report or to UNESCO. The papers can be cited with the following reference: “Paper
commissioned for the EFA Global Monitoring Report 2008, Education for All by 2015: will we make it.
For further information, please contact efareport@unesco.org

TABLE OF CONTENTS

A.
B.

I.Introduction
The Gender Equity Goals in Education and Their Importance
Obstacles – in Plain Sight and Hidden – on the Road to Gender Equity
in Education

II.
A.
B.
C.
III.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.

IV.
A.
B.
V.
A.
B.
C.

VI.

Discovering the Contours of the Camouflaged Rock of Gender
Bias in Textbooks: Illustrative Studies from Developing Nations
Syria
India
Romania

3
3
4

7
7
8
9

Discovering and Combating Gender Bias in Textbooks in the U.S.
The Problem is Named and Measured: A Saga that Begins in the Early 1970s
New Legislation Changes the Underlying Climate Concerning Gender Equity
in Education
Activists Measure Textbook Bias and Spur the Adoption of Codes
and Standards
Measuring the Pace of Progress: Second Generation Studies
The Scorecard on Gender Bias in Specific Content Areas: The 2007 Handbook
Of Gender Equity in Education

12
12
13

Following the Money: Support in Identifying and Combating Gender Bias
in Textbooks and Curricula in the Developing World
Research (and Development of Some Pilot Materials) in China, with Ford
Foundation Help
The Larger-Scale Girls’ Education Interventions Promoted by the World Bank

20

Gender Bias in Textbooks in Developing Countries: Different Paths from
Research to Action
Case Studies of Government Initiatives Concerning Gender Bias in Latin
American Texts
More Research on Gender Bias in Textbooks in Latin America
and the Caribbean
A Study of Gender Bias in Indian Textbooks and Grass-roots Exercises
to Counter it
The Best “Bias Busters”? Sweden and Other Nordic Countries

VII. Conclusions and Recommendations
A.
Conclusions
B.
Recommendations
Bibliography
Appendix A

13
16
17

20
22
24
24
27
29

30
33
33
35
37
52

2

GENDER BIAS IN TEXTBOOKS: A HIDDEN OBSTACLE ON THE ROAD TO
GENDER EQUALITY IN EDUCATION
Rae Lesser Blumberg
With the assistance of Meghan O’Leary
University of Virginia
I. INTRODUCTION.
A. The Gender Equity Goals in Education and Their Importance
Goals matter so let’s begin by quoting some remarkable ones verbatim (UNESCO 2003:27):
•

•

Goal 5 of the Education for All (EFA) Dakar Goals (2000) calls for “Eliminating gender
disparities in primary and secondary education by 2005, and achieving gender equality
in education by 2015, with a focus on ensuring girls’ full and equal access to and
achievement in basic education of good quality.”
Millennium Development Goal (MDG) 3 is to “Promote gender equality and empower
women,” and its Target 4 is: “Eliminate gender disparity in primary and secondary
education, preferably by 2005, and in all levels of education no later than 2015.”

The road to those goals began at the EFA conference in Jomtien, Thailand in 1990. It drew world
attention to achieving Universal Primary Education and closing the gender gap in education. By
then, evidence was emerging about the cornucopia of benefits gained by educating girls. They
encompassed the girl, her family, her future children, her community and the wealth and wellbeing of her nation (Blumberg 1989). No negative impacts were encountered. Female education,
for example, was found to be a powerful contraceptive – at a time when evidence revealed high
fertility to be inversely linked to national income growth (Hess 1988). And all but one (#5) of the
following 8 benefits claimed for girls’ education had been empirically related to lower fertility:
(1) a later age of marriage; (2) increased contraceptive usage; (3) lower fertility [itself]; (4)
dramatically reduced infant and child mortality; (5) improved child nutrition and general family
health; (6) greater participation in the waged, modern sector labor force; (7) higher earnings, and
(8) increased national development as measured by GNP (Blumberg 1989:xviii-xix).
By 2000, when these EFA and MDG goals were adopted, even more benefits had emerged, e.g.:
In a 100-country study, Dollar and Gatti (1999) learned that a 1 percent increase in the share of
females with secondary education raises annual per capita income growth by 0.3 percent. Also,
if the gender parity gap in the regions where it remains largest – Sub-Saharan Africa, South Asia
and the Middle East and North Africa – had fallen at the same rate as in East Asia during 19601990, their per capita GNP would have grown by 0.5-0.9 percent more per year (Klasen 1999).
But timely achievement of even the easier goal of closing the gender gap in access will be a
challenge. At least 70 countries fell short of gender parity in primary education by 2005 and 24
are considered unlikely to achieve gender parity in either primary or secondary school by 2015
(UNESCO 2006). Consequently, it’s now clear that the chances of reaching the more ambitious
EFA goal of gender equality in education by 2015 are remote at best.

3

Nonetheless, the statement of the goals and targets, and their backing by almost all segments of
the international community, provides a momentum that has not previously existed for progress
(Colclough 2007). And the rate of progress has been palpable since the adoption of these goals
and measures at the turn of the century: despite some “off-track” countries, there has been a very
widespread rise in gender parity in enrollments. Also, girls’ achievement is growing: in a
number of mostly middle- and high-income countries, girls are maintaining their edge in reading
while making progress toward closing the gap in mathematics and science (Ma 2007).
B. Obstacles – in Plain Sight and Hidden – on the Road to Gender Equity in Education
However, the obstacles that still abound along the route to full gender equality in education
remain just as important to consider as the goals themselves.
Some of the stumbling blocks to achieving gender parity and, ultimately, equality in education
are quite visible. As noted, they tend to be concentrated in the three regions of South Asia, subSaharan Africa and the Middle East-North Africa, especially in low-income countries there. One
analysis of 16 such countries, 14 of them in sub-Saharan Africa (Wils et al. 2005), revealed two
disturbing patterns: First, concerning educational quality, only 37.44 percent of boys and 33.25
percent of girls were able to read by the time they completed primary school. Second, concerning
gender equity, the fact that girls lagged behind in reading, their strong suit, is another indicator
that gender equality in education is unlikely to be achieved by 2015 or in a reasonably short
timeframe thereafter in the most severely “off-track” countries.
In the face of these chilling statistics, the problem of gender bias in textbooks (or the related
issue of gender bias in curricula and teachers’ treatment of students) appears less urgent. 1
Still, even if not a crisis, such gender bias has consequences. Specifically, this paper makes a
two-fold basic argument: (1) Gender bias in textbooks does matter, and (2) It turns out to be one
of the best camouflaged – and hardest to budge – rocks in the road to gender equality in
education. The paper also argues several additional points: (3) Gender bias in textbooks is far
more widespread geographically than the remaining gender gap in parity noted above. (4)
Additionally, gender bias in texts involves a common pattern: studies from the full gamut of
developing and developed countries find that females tend to be greatly underrepresented and
both males and females depicted in such gender-stereotyped ways, that girls and boys’ visions of
who they are and what they can become are constrained. (5) Linked to this, in many countries, is
gender bias in formal curricula, so that girls are led away from mathematics and science and into
gender-stereotyped courses of study; meanwhile boys remain disadvantaged and relatively
unaided in reading and language skills in countries where they are behind in these areas.

1

This is despite the fact that the 2007 Education for All report (UNESCO 2006:2) identifies “stereotypes [that
persist] in learning materials and, too often, [differing] teachers’ expectations of girls and boys” as two issues that
negatively affect gender equality. Earlier, the 2003/4 EFA volume had proclaimed that “Full gender equality in
education would imply that girls and boys are offered the same chances to go to school and enjoy teaching methods,
curricula and academic orientation unaffected by gender bias” (2003:17, emphasis added).

4

Indeed, all these biases and their effects are part of the “hidden curriculum” (Stromquist et al.
1998). To this must be added the often gender-biased texts used in teacher training, as well as
the reinforcement of gender-stereotyped attitudes that this inculcates among teachers.
The final result of all this bias can be a sizeable, even if largely unnoticed, impediment on the
road to gender equality in education. Many girls seem to be navigating around this almost
invisible obstacle and the taken-for-granted gender stratification and role system camouflaging it.
But we have no way of knowing how much faster and easier their progress might be if they
didn’t have to deal with this hindrance in the first place. And we have no way of knowing if that
statistic about girls’ weaker performance in reading in the poorest school systems is affected by
the additional discouragement of encountering gender bias in learning materials and teachers.
The gender biases beneath the camouflage began to be exposed around 1970-71, when activists
and/or educators, mainly in the U.S., started to systematically document them. They used content
analyses of textbooks and other more qualitative methodologies. Soon the effort to expose and
ameliorate gender biases in textbooks (and, sometimes, in curricula) spread around the world.
What is striking about these far-flung studies is how similar their findings turned out to be:
•
•

•

Whether measured in lines of text, proportion of named characters (human or animal),
mentions in titles, citations in indexes, and so forth, females were underrepresented.
Moreover, both genders were shown in highly gender-stereotyped ways in the household
as well as in the occupational division of labor, and in the actions, attitudes and traits
portrayed. (To wit: women were accommodating, nurturant drudges; girls passive
conformists, and boys and men did almost all the impressive, noble, exciting and fun
things and almost none of the caring, or “feminine” acts or jobs.)
Almost everyone who has done comparative research on gender bias in textbooks has
reached essentially the same conclusion. For example Ikuko Anjo Jassey in Japan found:
Virtually all of the studies concluded that textbooks have not adequately reflected
the range of women’s roles and occupations in the real world. In general, it seems
gender biased images remain strongly present in school textbooks throughout the
world (Jassey 1998:88).

The high level of consistency of the findings has affected the presentation of results in this paper:
there will be no detailed table summarizing dozens of very similar studies. We started this
project with an elaborate coding scheme so that we could do a “meta-analysis” of the existing
literature on gender bias in textbooks. Soon we saw that almost all content analyses were telling
essentially the same story, with minor variations – regardless of (1) the country/region in which
they had been carried out; (2) its income/level of development; (3) the level of instruction
covered (from primary through secondary to teacher training); (4) the subject matter (children’s
general readers to specialized books on mathematics, science, social studies, etc.), or (5) the date
of publication (although a generally slow reduction in gender bias is discernible in the typical
“second generation” study conducted at least a decade after the “first generation” research).
Accordingly, we’ve decided to present the argument in prose exposition.

5

Its jumping off point is that textbooks cannot be ignored. Why not? Consider the following
statistics:
•
•

Sadker and Zittleman (2007:144) cite research “that students spend as much as 80 to 95
percent of classroom time using textbooks and that teachers make a majority of their
instructional decisions based on the textbook.”
And a Canadian study found that the average teacher uses textbooks for 70 to 90 percent
of classroom time (Baldwin and Baldwin 1992).

Moreover, textbooks also reflect curricula. And both textbooks and curricula tend to be
expensive enough to overhaul that most poor countries don’t undertake a “clean sweep” major
revision in the absence of significant regime change (Benavot 2007) – and/or outside funding.
Below, we will see that there have been more sources of funding available to identify gender
biases in learning materials than to undertake the more costly work to revamp them. People have
not been known to demonstrate in the street or march to the presidential palace demanding the
elimination of gender bias in educational materials. Nor should they be expected to do so: both
curricula and textbooks reflect the larger gender stereotype and stratification system (Stromquist
et al. 1998), and the taken-for-granted invisibility and inertia that this creates. As the old
Chinese proverb asks, “does the fish know it swims in the ocean?” To return to a dry land
metaphor, it is time to strip the camouflage off the hidden obstacle of gender bias in learning
materials. Only then can it be seen for what it is, analyzed and, hopefully, pushed off the road.
Organization of the paper. Section II presents illustrative studies from three “majority world”
countries: Syria, India and Romania. All three are at different points on the trajectory to gender
parity and equality in education but, once the camouflage is stripped away, all reveal a similar
pattern of gender bias in their textbooks. Section III presents a case study of what has happened
vis-à-vis gender bias in textbooks in the U.S. from the early 1970s to the present. Among its
findings are that (1) it takes passion and free labor and/or support from donors or the state to
empirically establish gender bias in textbooks (and curricula), and (2) it takes considerably more
funding to reform them. So Section IV “follows the money.” It considers two examples from
developing countries: (1) The Ford Foundation support that led to documentation of gender bias
in Chinese textbooks at most educational levels (as reported in two special issues of the journal,
Chinese Education and Society, in 2002-2003), and (2) a brief look at the World Bank support, at
a much higher level of funding, that introduced explicit components – aimed at reducing gender
bias in textbooks, curricula and, often, teacher treatment of girls vs. boys – into large-scale
education projects. Section V looks at different paths from studies to action in selected
developing countries, focusing primarily on Latin America and the Caribbean. Then, Section VI
looks briefly at the Nordic countries – especially Sweden – where reforms of curricula and
textbooks appear to have gone the farthest. Finally, Section VII presents the summary,
conclusions/lessons learned and recommendations.

6

II. DISCOVERING THE CONTOURS OF THE CAMOUFLAGED ROCK OF GENDER
BIAS IN TEXTBOOKS: ILLUSTRATIVE STUDIES FROM DEVELOPING NATIONS
Studies dealing with three countries are discussed in some detail here: (1) Syria; (2) the state of
West Bengal, as well as an overview of India, and (3) Romania. The studies entail varying
levels of quantitative content analysis and qualitative approaches. And the three nations represent
three different points on the road to gender equity in education. To illustrate this, the heading for
each country includes its male/female Gross Enrollment Ratios (GERs) and Gender Parity Index
(GPI) in secondary education (where there is considerable variation among the three nations).
A. Syria (2004 secondary education GER= 65% for males; 61% for females; Gender Parity
Index=0.93 (UNESCO 2006:286-287))
In 1985, Alrabaa published “Sex Division of Labor in Syrian School Textbooks” (no newer work
by Alrabaa or for Syria was found but this research merits detailed attention). A total of 28
textbooks used in grades 8-12 were analyzed and found to be male-biased in content and
language; indeed, the author concluded that females were derogated and victimized. The books’
annual readership was over 500,000 students and the texts spanned all major subjects.
Alrabaa points out that the bias in these textbooks occurred despite: (1) a 1963 education policy
making the preparation and approval of textbooks a highly centralized, mostly state-controlled
enterprise (ibid.:337); (2) a 1965 Syrian Government proposal to create a curriculum conducive
to sex-role equality, and (3) a 1975 campaign which called upon Syrian citizens to “remove any
practice derogatory to the dignity of women.”
In addition to a quantitative study of occupations assigned to male and female characters, a
subset of textbooks prescribed in 1979-81 were subjected to a more intensive quantitative
analysis of themes and images. The two studies’ main quantitative findings are as follows:
•

First, concerning prevalence: males proved the leading characters in 75 percent of the 353
lessons analyzed; they also were 87 percent of those portrayed in 54 biographies (ibid.)

•

Second, concerning the division of labor: the analysis counted a total of 463 occupations:
84 percent (391) were filled by males and 16 percent (72) by females. The distribution
by frequency scores (N = 2,083) is almost identical: 85 percent males vs. 15 percent
females. Looking at the specific occupations engaged in by men, there were 89
presidents/kings, 52 soldiers, 44 employees, 43 students, 42 MDs as well as 42 teachers,
30 poets, 28 peasants, 28 writers, and 27 sheikhs (there also were 19 scientists and 19
political leaders). All told, 343 occupations were assigned exclusively to males. In
contrast, only 12 occupations were assigned to females: housewives (21) predominate,
and teacher and nurse also proved common (ibid.:339-341). Overall, women almost
invariably were shown as economically dependent domestic creatures.

•

Third, in terms of favorable images: For males, brave was the most common (N=82),
followed by popular (75). Rounding out the “top 10” list were strong (54), kind (41),
achiever (50), innovative (49), adventurous (48), hard working (44), generous (40) and

7

educated (39). The list for females included beautiful (42), kind (23 – this is one of only
two overlaps in the top 10), loving (20), faithful (19), motherly (19), compassionate (18),
generous (17), loyal (17), educated (14 – the other overlap) and dependent (14) (ibid.).
Qualitative findings: Additional analyses found that male-centered language was used
(specifically, masculine nouns such as “mankind,” and pronouns such as “he”). Thus, male
words served as all-inclusive terms for both males and females.
Another analysis looked at traditional sex roles. Males were depicted as “masters” in their
homes. They didn’t consult females even on such household-oriented topics as controlling
children, let alone on such issues as household budgeting. Females were chastised for
disagreeing with the males. Often, they were depicted as fixated on maintaining the household
to a high standard in order to make the husband happy (ibid.:343).
Still another topic was “derogation of women.” This was the undertone in many descriptions
otherwise praising women for subservience and devotion to domestic duties. Females often were
portrayed as manipulative, jealous creatures; as “fussy do-nothings;” as weak, irrational,
superstitious, or “despicable” (ibid.:345).
The final topic involved “victimization and acquiescence.” Female sex-role victimization was
not infrequent, according to Alrabaa. The author also notes: “The plots of texts project an
exaggerated view of male power” (ibid.:346). Alrabaa also found some men portrayed as
obsessed by “muscle-bound masculinity,” as well as instances where women who deviated from
traditional roles depicted as proper were physically punished (ibid.). Moreover, “the textbooks
imply that women should endure an abusive male, accepting his violence as ‘natural’…the
female’s silent suffering is highlighted as an inherently good female quality” (ibid.).
Still, Syria’s record on education is closer to EFA gender goals than is that of India, which has
made less progress toward gender parity in enrollment. Additionally, India has one of the world’s
most skewed sex ratios, an increasingly used indicator of gender discrimination (Blumberg and
Holian 2004): 92.7 women per 100 men, vs. 105-106 women to 100 men in developed industrial
countries, and even 102 women to 100 men in Sub-Saharan Africa (where women are valued as
farmers; they raise up to 80 percent of locally grown food crops (Saito and Weidemann 1990)).
B. India (2004 secondary education GER=59% for males; 47% for females; Gender Parity
Index=0.80 (UNESCO 2006:290-291))
A brief 2002 article by Jon Ellis concerning school textbooks in the state of West Bengal is not
as sophisticated as Alrabaa’s study in Syria. But the magnitude of gender bias he encountered in
the state’s main History and Geography texts (Parts 1 and 2, published in 1992 and 1996,
respectively) appears to be about as strong.
Part 1 has 71 pictures of males (76 percent) vs. 22 of females (24 percent), a better record than
many. But its discussion of Early Humans wrongly depicts women mainly in subservient roles.
[Ellis doesn’t note this but there is considerable gender equality among contemporary hunters
and gatherers, and studies have found that women’s gathering often accounts for 60-80 percent

8

of the diet (this literature is reviewed in Blumberg’s 2006 background paper for the 2007
UNESCO Education for All report).]
And Part 2 shows far more extreme gender bias than Part 1: it has 50 pictures of males (96
percent) vs. 2 of females (4 percent). One is shown carrying a pitcher of water from a pond; the
other is picking tea. Not a single woman is depicted in the chapter about “Main Ways of Earning
a Living.” Nor, in another illustration, are any women shown as receiving land titles from a male
government officer. Ellis claims that this “is a false view of reality since in West Bengal,
numerous households have women as their heads, who hold [titles] in their own name.”
The author concludes that the “gender bias against women found in the text and pictures of these
books makes them unacceptable for use.” He has a particular use in mind: The government was
about to expand adoption of these books from class three and four of middle schools throughout
the state to a new “city-wide program in Kolkatta” that would provide primary education for
thousands of deprived urban children. Based on his analysis, Ellis opposed this.
In India, are such gender-biased textbooks unique to West Bengal? Firoz Bakht Ahmed (2006)
takes a national perspective in another brief article. He notes that since 1982-83, the National
Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERTS) “has been laying stress on removing
gender disparities – specifically emphasizing the elimination of sex stereotypes and sex biases
from textbooks.” He also concludes that “be it a book on science, social studies, mathematics,
English or Hindi, women can be seen fetching water, working in kitchens or cleaning the
room…[and that, consistently,] lessons…are male-centric.”
He cites a survey by Friends of Education that noted that the average primary school textbook
has 115-130 pages and carries 80-100 illustrations. Their study found that “over half of the
illustrations depict [solely] men and boys…and only six percent show [solely] women and girls.”
Analysis of the six mathematics books used in the primary classes showed that men dominate
activities representing commercial, occupational and marketing situations, whereas not a single
woman is shown as a shopkeeper, merchant, executive, engineer or seller.
Ahmed’s overall conclusion is that: “Despite the NCERT having developed a set of guidelines
for the elimination of gender stereotyping in textual material and the same disseminated to the
authors and publishers, not much has changed.”
C. Romania (2004 secondary education GER=85% for males; 86% for females; Gender Parity
Index=1.01 (UNESCO 2006:286-287))
Mihaela Miroiu’s 2004 journal article on Romania rounds out this section. Thus far, we have
seen that Syria has a slight gender gap in education and India a larger one. As we also have seen,
both countries have proclaimed official efforts at the national level to reduce or eliminate gender
bias in education and textbooks, although the analyses belie these. Will Romania, where girls do
not lag behind in enrollment, have less stereotyped and gender-biased textbooks?
Like its neighbors, Romania has transitioned from a socialist to a market economy. Its gender
enrollment patterns also share more similarity with other Eastern European ex-socialist states

9

than with Syria or India. According to Miroiu’s statistics, girls have a small edge on overall
enrollment (67.8 percent, vs. 66.5 percent for boys). Specifically, although boys slightly
outnumber girls in primary and gymnasia levels, females are 54 percent of high school pupils.
And girls get 5.24 percent higher grades, on average. Miroiu also argues that “the education
system must overcome the conservatism of the general population” about gender-and-educationrelated values (ibid.:87). She finds, however, that textbooks are not taking a lead role in this.
First, she defines some terms related to gender, including “gender neutral,” which she terms “the
tendency to ignore gender differences as being irrelevant and thus to perpetuate stereotypes as
they exist” (2004:86). Second, she notes that:
Several studies on textbooks…reveal gender problems. Texts are generally gender
neutral but their content is a more significant promoter of gender stereotypes than are
curricula (2004:90). The data are striking.
Illustrations show a stark disparity: “of 106 textbooks analyzed, the percentage of the pictures
illustrating girls/women is…12.8 percent.” While first and second grade textbook pictures depict
24 percent girls/women, the proportion drops steadily to 10 percent by 12th grade. (An interesting
exception involves book covers: 45 percent contain images of both sexes.)
Content. The overall percentages are less extreme than for the illustrations (other than book
covers; see above): of 4,318 human images, 64.8 percent are male, 33.2 percent are female
[presumably, gender in the remaining 2 percent could not be ascertained].
But when it comes to depiction of trades and occupations, the pattern is much more extreme.
Textbooks for third to twelfth grade contain only 2.2 percent of women working (whereas
national statistics for 2004 show more than half of all women to be economically active). Out of
5,620 images, 1,306 contain recognizable trades: 1,290 are performed by men, vs. only 16 by
women (ibid.:91). Similarly, only 1 percent of men are placed in domestic situations.
Textbook subject matter. The same basic pattern emerges here – and quite strongly. Of the
16,600 lines and 415 pages analyzed in a primary level language and communication text, only 8
lines featured women in public life and 3 lines men in the home. Of 1,966 problems in
mathematics and sciences only 282 contain people – and “none of them are in non-traditional
roles” (ibid.:92). The situation is hardly more gender-egalitarian in other disciplines. For
example, in Romanian language and literature, the “main characters are all masculine; in history,
women are wives and mothers of leaders, and Roma women “simply aren’t there;” in arts, there
“are only male composers and artists” (ibid.:93).
Authorship. The above results cannot be ascribed to an absence of female authors. In Romania,
women write about half the primary school texts (52% of 404 authors), and they comprise 43
percent of the 1,655 authors of high school texts. Moreover, “There is no direct correlation
between the gender of the author and the level of gender fairness promoted in the texts” (ibid.).
* * *

10

This small set of examples should suffice to illustrate the general patterns for the last ~35 years.
There are hints that higher levels of patriarchy in a society seem to be associated with more
intensely negative depiction of females (i.e., Romanian descriptions were gender-stereotyped but
females did not seem as disparaged). But three other dimensions – (1) underrepresentation of
females in words and illustrations, (2) gender stereotypes about occupational and domestic roles,
and (3) gender-stereotyped individual attributes and actions – seem equally prevalent across
geographic boundaries and levels of patriarchy. In sum, the patterns reveal remarkable
convergence over space and time.

11

III. DISCOVERING AND COMBATING GENDER BIAS IN TEXTBOOKS IN THE U.S.
Even though the key focus of this paper is gender inequity in learning materials in developing
countries, it pays to examine how this issue was discovered and addressed in the United States.
A. The Problem is Named and Measured: A Saga that Begins in the Early 1970s
Actually, one earlier study was done in 1946. Child, Potter and Levine (1960) discovered that
primary school textbooks often portrayed females rather negatively and stereotypically, e.g., as
manipulative. Nothing happened. But around 1970, the “second wave women’s movement”
burst onto the scene. And a lot began to happen. In 1971, activist Marjorie U’Ren published a
content analysis of “The Image of Woman in Textbooks” in an iconic feminist reader. She
analyzed 30 of the newest textbooks adopted or recommended for use in second to sixth grade
California schools. (As discussed below, textbook adoption is done at sub-national level in the
U.S.; the biggest states, e.g., California and Texas, have a huge influence on what is published.)
U’Ren’s 1971 findings are worth summarizing, since they map out the terrain – and preview the
findings – of large numbers of studies that quickly began to follow.
She found that at least 75 percent of the main characters were male, but because stories
about female characters were shorter, “the average book devotes less than 20 percent of
its story space to the female sex” (1971:318-319). She also found that “many books
devote only 15 percent of their illustrations to girls or women” – and that drawings
showed a far higher proportion of males than photographs of street scenes (ibid.:326).
Substantively, she found stories about girls to be duller. They are shown as subordinate
to brothers or doing uninteresting things and receiving no recognition even for those
accomplishments. Concerning adult women, in none of the 30 books did a mother
suggest a solution to a family crisis – fathers came home and took over. In one book,
Madame Curie is depicted as a mere helpmate for her husband’s projects, and in the
illustration, she is shown peeping over her husband’s shoulder while he engages a male
colleague in serious dialogue (ibid.:323). U’Ren also documents a picture of adult
females shown in subordinate, housewife-type activities (“textbook writers seem to have
reduced all females to a common denominator of cook, cleaner and seamstress”
(ibid.:327)) – rarely even driving cars. The only contemporary woman depicted as a
professional is a young female scientist described as engaged in a project she was
assigned to work on that “was not her own idea” (ibid.:324). In addition to women being
shown as not receiving any public recognition, their pursuit of economic empowerment is
portrayed negatively (ibid.). And in almost every story intended to be humorous, the butt
of the joke is a female. In contrast, boys are depicted doing all sorts of adventurous and
interesting activities while males of all ages are shown as strong, with greater mental
perseverance as well as moral strength (ibid.:325).
She also discovered that “such textbook stories are quite frequently written by females”
(ibid.), another finding that has often been replicated since then. Interestingly, however,
U’Ren makes a unique allegation: she claims that textbooks written for coeducation early

12

in the 20th century present a “much more favorable picture” of active and sometimes
adventurous or accomplished women than those portrayed after 1930 (ibid.:328). (She
attributes this to supposed 19th century “rough frontier equality” rather than the peak
years of the “first wave women’s movement,” however.)
Also in 1971, some analyses by professional educators began to appear, e.g., Trecker’s study of
“Women in U.S. History High School Textbooks,” which covered the most popular 1960s texts
and showed an almost total omission of “women of importance.” The next year, Weitzman et al.
published an article in a top-ranked sociology journal quantifying gender bias in picture books
for pre-school children. From that point on, studies multiplied quickly (see Hahn et al. 1985).
B. New Legislation Changes the Underlying Climate Concerning Gender Equity in Education
In 1972, “Title IX” was passed. This was a broad proscription against sex discrimination in any
U.S. government-funded education program or activity. Its most famous provisions involve
opening up female participation in athletics. Title IX did not specifically prohibit gender bias in
textbooks. But it did prohibit gender stereotypes in career counseling, or materials aimed at
recruiting males and females into different careers. Specifically, institutions had to “ensure that
recruitment practices, classroom treatment, assignments, facilities, career assessment tests, career
counseling, and evaluations are free from sex stereotypes” (Zittleman 2007:84). Title IX never
was funded at a level that would have permitted widespread enforcement of its many provisions.
Nevertheless, it helped change the climate in the United States. (Similarly, the EFA and MDG
goals and targets adopted 28 years later would do the same at the international level.)
Then, in 1974, the Women’s Educational Equity Act was passed. It specifically provided
funding for research and training to help schools eliminate sex bias. Hitherto, insufficient money
had been a big constraint in institutionalizing a more gender-equitable approach to education.
C. Activists Measure Textbook Bias and Spur the Adoption of Codes and Standards
In fact, once Title IX was passed but even before the 1974 funding bill was adopted, a strong
activist/volunteer effort arose to curb gender bias in textbooks. Newly energized feminists put
pressure on both large, important states and textbook publishers to reform their ways. Texas is
one of the most populous states but it is generally conservative in its culture, so the efforts of
Texas feminists to tackle gender bias in textbooks are all the more noteworthy.
In a telephone interview, Frances Hicks (2007) provided an insider’s view. When she became
involved, she was a mother of three (one in the Texas public schools) who had decided to pursue
higher education. She enrolled in community college and became the president of her local
chapter of NOW, the National Organization for Women. She soon became active in grassroots
efforts by a coalition of feminist organizations trying to weed out bias in textbooks. Their
campaign began in 1972, when the “second wave women’s movement” was reaching new
heights.
Hicks described what happened in 1973-4. Pressured by the campaign, the Texas State Board of
Education already had responded by adopting a Proclamation, paragraph 6-2 of which called for

13

textbooks to “present men and women participating in a variety of roles and activities, including
women in leadership and other positive roles with which they are not traditionally identified.
Illustrations and written material shall present goal choices and life styles for girls and women in
addition to marriage and homemaking. Economical, political, social, and cultural contributions
of men and women, past and present, shall be presented objectively” (Press Kit 1974).
On September 11, 1974, the feminist groups presented their protests at hearings on textbooks
held by the Texas Education Agency. This was a follow-up to their August presentation of over
400 “Bills of Particulars” written by 147 women and 3 men activists concerning textbooks being
considered for adoption for the next five year period. These were forwarded to the publishers,
who, by Texas law, must reply to each in writing; later hearings were to resolve these objections.
The activists had analyzed all new textbooks, covering kindergarten through twelfth grade, being
considered for adoption by the Texas Education Agency. They undertook a content analysis,
counting the number of males and females in illustrations, and the roles depicted for each gender.
They also coded whether females were watching or doing. In addition, they cited egregious
quotes from the books and analyzed each in a two-column format. Here are two brief examples,
one from a Teacher’s Manual for a reader and the other from a science textbook:

Quotation from Textbook
“It is obvious that the lovely princess
would have a difficult time finding a
husband; no man would want a wife who
could outdo him in so many ways. Josefa
is wise enough to understand…that her
ability may prove her undoing…”

Activists’ Analysis
The Teacher’s Manual accepts without
comment the situation that the conventional
courtship relationship in this story requires
both the man and the woman to deceive
each other and themselves.

J. B. Lippincott Co., Basic Reading-L,
Manual, p. 2

“…men will have to know about nuclear
power. And girls will be needed to work
as stewardesses on the giant submarines.”

O brave new man-made world, where men
are men and women are girls; where men
know about power and girls are “needed”
as servants.

Houghton Mifflin Co., Serendipity, p. 357.

14

In a handout prepared for a protest before the Textbook Selection Committee on October 1,
1974, the activists noted some (now-familiar) patterns of bias:
•
•
•

•

Their analysis revealed an average of three men or boys to every woman or girl; in some
books it was 10:1 or more. Moreover, the ratio widened going from first to twelfth
grades (the same phenomenon noted in the Romania analysis, above).
They also found an almost total lack of work roles for women, 2 who were almost always
portrayed as wives and mothers, and had characters that were both passive and menial.
They wrote: “it is rare…to see a warm, comforting mother, but not rare to see a shrewish
one, a confused one, or an incapable one…There is also hostility toward women to be
found…If a story character is contemptible, ridiculous, fails in endeavor, or lacks human
dignity, you can expect the character to be female. Males make derogatory remarks
about women in selection after selection. It is nearly unheard of for the reverse to be
shown.”
But they also noted that books varied in levels of sexism and that some publishers already
“have made changes in the direction of fairness” (“Introduction” 1974).

(Frances Hicks continued her activism on this issue through the 1970s. She finished her Ph.D.
and became an academic. In the late 1980s-early 1990s, she served on an official State of
Virginia task force that examined gender bias in textbooks. By that time, she found that the
problem had become institutionalized, and was being addressed by paid education professionals
rather than activist volunteers.)
More generally, although textbooks are usually adopted at the state level and supplied by
schools, there is more centralization than might be inferred from the fact that the U.S. has 50
states. As noted, it is the large ones that have more clout. Moreover, the textbook industry is
more centralized than the states. So in order to assure sales to their main (large state) markets,
publishers were willing to adopt codes and standards that, in theory, would reduce (if not
eliminate) the problem of gender bias in textbooks.
Furthermore, the same activist “second wave women’s movement” that brought pressure to bear
on textbook publishers and their associations concomitantly lobbied the different professional
associations (e.g., the American Psychological Association and the National Council for
Teachers of English) to promote gender equity in a variety of ways. Consequently, in the 1970s
and 1980s, both textbook publishers and professional associations:
issued guidelines for nonracist and nonsexist books, suggesting how to include and fairly
portray different groups in the curriculum. As a result, textbooks became more balanced
in their description of underrepresented groups; but problems of biased instructional
material persist (Sadker and Zittleman 2007:144).
What about progress since then? Even though recent content analyses of textbooks that measure
the proportion of materials involving women and girls find only modest rates of improvement,
their indicators almost never measure intensity. Today, it would be exceptional to find as sexist
2

In contrast, by 1970, fully half of U.S. women 18-64 were in the labor force (Oppenheimer 1973).

15

a comment in a children’s textbook as that about men=nuclear power; “girls”=stewardesses on
giant submarines. This introduces the topic of “second generation” research.
D. Measuring the Pace of Progress: Second Generation Studies
By the 1990s, various “second generation” studies began to analyze the persistence (or not) of
gender bias in a variety of substantive fields. Most showed modest improvements (sometimes
very modest indeed). Three sets are reviewed here: (1) high school history texts, both U.S.
history and world history; (2) children’s illustrated books, and (3) teacher training textbooks.
History. First, Clark et al. (2004) carried out a quantitative study that looked at six high schoollevel American history textbooks from each of three decades: 1960s, 1980s and 1990s. 3
Interestingly, the first 1970s academic study of textbook bias in the U.S. covered the same
subject (Trecker 1971); she had found that 1960s texts omitted almost all women of importance.
Thirty-three years later, Clark et al. found fairly moderate – but statistically significant –
improvements: women had been only 4.9 percent of names in indexes in the 1960s, but 12.7
percent in the 1980s and 16.3 percent in the 1990s. The study’s five other indicators also
showed the same mild-to-moderately positive pattern. The authors conclude that the depiction of
gender has improved modestly since the 1960s. They credit the feminist movement and earlier
studies (e.g., Trecker 1971; Tetrault 1986) for the gains.
Next, Clark et al. (2005) turned to world history texts used in American high schools over the
same three decades. They again chose six top texts from each decade and used six indicators.
This time, four of the six indicators increased a small but statistically significant amount. For
example, the proportion of women in the books’ indexes increased from 3.2 percent in the 1960s
to 5.9 percent in the 1980s to 10.6 percent in the 1990s. Note, however, that all rates for world
history were below those for U.S. history books; in fact, the 1990s world history rate still fell
below that found in 1980s American history texts, and only four of six indicators rose. Clark et
al. again attribute the gains to the feminist movement and earlier studies but they add women
authors as another possible reason: the only world history book with a female first author, Ellis
and Esler (1997), had the highest – but still moderate – scores on mentions of women.
Children’s illustrated books. Davis and McDaniel (1999) replicated Czaplinski’s (1972) analysis
of 1940-71 winners of the Caldecott award for children’s illustrated books. They analyzed 19721997 data. Characters were 63 percent male/37 percent female for 1940-1971. The comparable
figure for 1972-1997 was 61 percent male/39 percent female – a scant 2 percent rise. The
statistics for “characters portrayed through pictures” actually tilted further toward males: they
were 52 percent in the earlier period but had risen to 60 percent in the later period. The statistics
on proportion of females [merely] appearing in pictures rose, however, from a low of 19 percent
in the 1960s to 31 percent in the 1970s to 36 percent in the 1980s and then 35 percent in the

3

In addition, they compared the 2002 edition of Boorstin and Kelley with their earlier 1992 text (which was in the
1990s sample). The 1992 volume had been skewered in Sadker and Sadker’s Failing at Fairness (1994) for scanty
inclusion of women. Clark et al. found no improvement between 1992 and 2002: the index showed only 11 percent
women both times. They also note that Sadker and Sadker had asked hundreds of high school seniors to name 20
famous women in American history; the average student could name only 4 or 5.

16

1990s. Overall, however, the pace of change in picture books for young children is even slower
than in the history books aimed at high school students.
Three other studies of children’s picture books echo similar findings: Crabb and Bielawski
(1994) analyzed gender-stereotyped use of material culture – household artifacts vs. production
artifacts – in Caldecott Award books, 1937-89. They found females associated with the former
and males with the latter, with no change over time. Hamilton et al. (2006) analyzed 200 books:
Caldecott award-winners for 1995-2001 and best-sellers for 1999-2001. They used the analysis
scheme pioneered by Weitzman et al. (1972) and also divided characters into children vs. adults.
They found nearly twice as many male as female title and main characters, and male characters
appeared 53 percent more times in illustrations. Although women’s occupational roles had
broadened somewhat over earlier studies, occupations were gender stereotyped. Nor did a
comparison of their sample to 1980s-early ’90s books reveal reduced sexism. In 2005, Anderson
and Hamilton had used the same 200-book sample to study mothers vs. fathers. They found
fathers underrepresented, and depicted as ineffectual/withdrawn parents when they did appear.
Teacher training textbooks. Zittleman and Sadker (2002) followed up the classic Sadker and
Sadker (1980) study of gender bias in teacher training materials. (This is important because
other studies show that teachers develop “gender blindness” to biased texts if they have not been
given gender sensitization instruction.) The 1980 study analyzed 24 leading teacher education
texts: 23/24 devoted less than 1 percent of their content to women’s contributions or challenges
and 8/24 didn’t even mention the topic of sex bias. Several actually promoted gender stereotypes.
The restudy involved 23 textbooks published from 1998-2001. Using the 1980 study’s evaluation
methods, they found progress to be “minimal” and “disappointing.” The average percentage of
women-related coverage rose to 3.3 percent. The introductory texts averaged 7.3 percent, but the
16 methods books (for reading, science, mathematics and social studies) averaged only 1.3
percent. Social studies offered the most coverage (2.5 percent) and reading texts the least (0.3
percent). But despite the quantitative data showing that textbooks are far from gender-equitable,
they also found that “today’s textbooks are less offensive than those published more than 20
years ago.”
All in all, then, it appears that the intensity of bias is diminishing: the most egregious and blatant
examples of sexism seem to have disappeared or been muted, even though the numbers certainly
have not improved dramatically.
E. The Scorecard on Gender Bias in Specific Content Areas: The 2007 Handbook of Gender
Equity in Education
In 1985, Sue Klein edited the Handbook for Achieving Sex Equity through Education. Among
the problems it highlighted was gender bias in textbooks spanning different subject areas, as well
as in curricula. Now, the second edition (Klein et al. 2007) provides an update. Aside from the
continuing work of Sadker and colleagues (e.g., Sadker et al. 2007), none of the chapters
includes a classic content analysis of gender bias in texts. Rather, the subject matter chapters
discuss different gender equity issues; mention of gender bias in textbooks/curriculum varies
from nil to substantial. The following chapters illustrate the range.

17

Let us begin with the two excellent chapters on “Gender Equity in Mathematics” (Lacampagne
et al. 2007) and “Gender Equity in Science, Engineering and Technology” (Burger et al. 2007).
Unfortunately, their virtues do not include any discussion whatsoever about gender bias in
textbooks and they contain only the most oblique of references to curricula. This is ironic, since
they treat the fields where women still remain the most underrepresented both as students and as
employees. From 1966-2001, the proportion of females receiving a bachelor’s degree has been
going up in all fields surveyed except two: (1) mathematics (which has slid below the 1966 level
of 33.2 percent and the 1985 highpoint of 39.5 percent to 31.8 percent in 2001, per Table 13.1 in
Burger et al. 2007:257), and (2) computer science (where the percentage of women receiving
bachelor’s degrees declined from 28.6 percent in 1994 to 27.6 percent in 2001, though the
number of women increased (ibid.:256)). Neither chapter considers the fact that textbooks may
still be contributing to gender stereotypes about women’s unsuitability for such pursuits. It is a
missed opportunity that the mathematics and science chapters did not even consider the topic.
Turning to “Gender Equity in Communication Skill” (Taylor et al. 2007), the authors note that
the 1985 Handbook chapter on the issue made four principal recommendations to enhance the
competence of both males and females. One was that “reading materials should portray females
and males in non-stereotypical situations, including reading as something that males can do and
high-level thinking as something females can do.” Progress on this recommendation seems to
have been slight: In the 2007 chapter, the authors still devote a section to “gender bias in
communication curriculum and learning materials.” Their literature review finds such results as:
Sixteen of the 17 public-speaking texts analyzed by Hanson (1999) pictures men in
power positions more frequently than women and all of the texts pictured men more
frequently in photographs, a finding replicated in Gullock et al.’s (2005) examination of
the 2002 ten best-selling public-speaking texts…Hanson…found that the mean number of
pages devoted to discussing gender issues was 7.26, fewer than 5 percent of the pages.
The near-absence of women as speakers, writers, and theorists in public communication
materials…leaves intact the privileging of men’s activities with very little attention to the
gender implications” (2007:292-293).
In short, a field in which women are better represented than in mathematics and scienceengineering and in which girls perform better than boys by most measures is once again found to
give females short shrift in textbooks and curricula.
The final subject area is social studies, and the 1985 and current chapters make for an interesting
comparison vis-à-vis gender equity. The first substantive discussion in the 1985 chapter (Hahn
et al.) was under the heading, “Inadequate Textbooks.” The section presented a literature review
of research (from 1971-1982) documenting the underrepresentation and stereotyping of females
in social studies textbooks. Also discussed were the new guidelines being adopted by publishers
and the new supplementary materials that were being produced (mainly by activist groups).
Dissemination of the new curricular materials and continued curriculum reform were seen as the
needs for the future. But in the final section, it was noted that, whereas “in the 1970s, federal
funding was an impetus that helped bring about curriculum revision,” in the future it would be
local school systems, state education agencies and private foundations that would be the source
of support. The implication was that the federal funding party might be ending.

18

The 2007 chapter (Hahn et al.) makes explicit that it did. In the “Introduction” section, the
authors note: “The dramatic decline in federal funding for research and curriculum development
focused on gender equity over the last 20 years has contributed” to a pattern of sporadic and
ebbing attention to gender (2007:335). This underlines the fact that revision of textbooks and
curricula to reduce gender bias is an expensive undertaking. Given the decline in levels of
federal funding flowing from the Women’s Education Equity Act of 1974 and in free labor from
feminist activists as the crest of the “second wave women’s movement” receded, the slow pace
of change found in the 1980s-1990s “second generation” studies is more understandable.
The tone of the 2007 chapter is much less optimistic than in 1985: “despite the years of
advocacy in literature and practice, we found remarkably little empirical evidence to show that
social studies has become more gender equitable” (ibid.:336). 4
Instead, new issues have emerged that have “marginalized gender equity initiatives” (ibid.:337).
These include:
(1) the “high-stakes testing movement” (see footnote for an explanation); 5
(2) the “attention to multiculturalism [that] has overshadowed [or subsumed] gender;”
(3) the commonly held belief that gender equity has been realized;
(4) the return of the “boy problem in education” [e.g., poorer reading performance, lower
high school graduation rates, declining enrollments in post-secondary education, etc.]
(ibid.), and, ironically,
(5) social studies departments in high schools becoming even more male-dominated now
than before the passage of Title IX, since female athletes need coaches and many schools
reserve social studies jobs for (mostly male) coaches (ibid.:352).
***
The main conclusion of this section is that in the U.S., where the problem first was named and
studied, there has been more progress in reducing the worst examples of sexism in textbooks and
curricula (i.e., the “intensity factor”) than in increasing the relative – and less stereotyped –
representation of women. Nonetheless, many people (wrongly) think the battle has been won.
And now newer issues receive the funds that once might have gone to expensive efforts at
revising textbooks and curricula in order to reduce gender bias. 6

4

In fact, the 2007 chapter cites only a few recent content analysis studies of gender bias in textbooks.
This entails new standardized tests and heavy penalties to schools (loss of funding) and students (denial of
diplomas) for failing scores. The result, often, has shifted classroom time to a desperate race to get pupils’ scores
high enough to pass.
6
One last point: Sadker (n.d.) offers a useful list of seven forms of bias that can be used to assess instructional
materials. These are reproduced in Appendix A.
5

19

IV. FOLLOWING THE MONEY: SUPPORT IN IDENTIFYING AND COMBATING
GENDER BIAS IN TEXTBOOKS AND CURRICULA IN THE DEVELOPING WORLD
A. Research (and Development of Some Pilot Materials) in China, with Ford Foundation Help
The Ford Foundation in China had a reputation for strong leadership in gender issues in the
period surrounding the turn of the millennium. In October 2000 it funded an ambitious effort by
20 researchers to (1) investigate and document gender bias in textbooks at all levels of subtertiary education, and then (2) develop and disseminate some educational plans, activities and
reference materials based on gender equity. The results of the research phase are unusually
accessible because one of the products was the publication of two special issues of the journal,
Chinese Education and Society, in 2002 and 2003. The former encompasses pre-primary and
primary levels, and the latter includes junior middle school and adult literacy learning materials.
The editors of the first special issue (Shi and Ross 2002:3) begin by discussing the policy context
for achieving gender equity in schooling. First, they note, in May 2001, the State Council passed
a Program for the Development of Chinese Women (2001-2010). It included the following:
• The primary objectives of women’s education shall be incorporated in the state’s plan for
education, and
• Social gender awareness shall be incorporated into training courses for teachers during
the reform of courses, educational content, and teaching methods.
Second, they add, the Council also ratified a Program for the Development of Chinese Children
(2001-2010). It declared:
• Awareness of gender equality shall be incorporated in the contents of education.
Research methods included both quantitative content analysis of textbooks and classroom-based
investigations. The first volume begins with kindergarten (for 4-year-olds) and extends through
elementary school (the focus of almost all the studies). The content analyses of textbooks reveal
the usual patterns:
• Males are disproportionately overrepresented, and females appear most often in reading
materials for very young children. The proportion of male characters rises from 48
percent in books for 4-year-olds to 61 percent in books for 6-year-olds. Even here,
however, where most stories focus on family life, gender-stereotyped roles are
reproduced (Liu 2002).
• Chen and Chen (2002) document an analogous picture in the new five-volume series of
mathematics books used in elementary schools. First, males are almost two-third of those
depicted. Second, males are 74 percent of those in stimulating activities, whereas
females are 70 percent of those in passive activities. The usual gender role stereotypes
are present in full force: courageous, independent, ambitious and sometimes naughty
boys, vs. passive, obedient, neat, cooperative girls.
• Yi (2002) analyzes social studies texts. The following is not surprising: 100 percent of
scientists and soldiers are male, whereas 100 percent of teachers and 75 percent of
service personnel are female. Males dominate the public sphere and females the private
sphere. In fact, one woman who was one of the most influential leaders of the Chinese

20

•

Communist Party – and state – is depicted twice: (1) mending Premier Zhou Enlai’s
clothes, and (2) bringing an umbrella to a guard on a rainy day.
Guo and Zhao (2002) analyze the 12-volume elementary language textbooks. Females
are only about a fifth of the historical characters portrayed and the usual male/female
stereotypes render them dull and lifeless in comparison with the vibrant males.

Also, not surprisingly, teacher-pupil and peer interaction followed the same stereotypes, to
girls’ disadvantage, in several classroom-based articles.
The editors’ authorship in the second special issue (2003) was reversed: Ross and Shi. But
the findings – which, in this volume, cover junior middle school and adult literacy education
– generally show the same patterns that emerged at the pre-primary and primary levels. One
new element is discussed, however: a mismatch between the curricula, which are genderbiased, “and the actual life experiences of women and men and girls and boys in China’s
diverse and rapidly changing communities” (Ross and Shi 2003:3).
•

•

•
•

The first substantive article in this special issue is historical rather than quantitative.
Wang (2003) goes back to the 19th century, examining the last days of the Qing
dynasty. He also looks at the Republican China that followed, until its fall in the late
1940s to the victorious Communists. The end of the Qing marked the beginning of
articles urging girls not to have their feet bound, citing the harm it causes. A 1907
Qing text was titled, Mandarin Language Textbook for the Liberation of Girls, and its
illustrations include women getting together to unwind their foot bindings, as well as
schoolgirls with unbound feet playing vivaciously. But that is as far as it goes: the
family/public sphere roles are depicted in the usual stereotyped fashion for females
vs. males. In Republican China, by the 1920s and 1930s, especially after the Japanese
invaded, women were asked to take on modern knowledge and work in addition to
their usual roles. This was represented in a dialogue between the independent,
outward-looking Mrs. Zhang and the home-bound and content Mrs. Qin. In the final
years before the Communists won, two literatures competed – the urban-based “petty
bourgeois ladies” of the Kuomintang-held areas, vs. the bold, vigorous, sturdy
working women of the rural-centered revolutionary bases. The Communist triumph
in the late 1940s brought the slogan “women are able to hold up half the sky.” It laid
the foundation for their becoming much-needed labor power and helped their status.
Zhang (2003) describes how students in the second year of junior middle school gave
contradictory descriptions of their mothers, their teachers, and the women in their
Chinese language texts. Concerning their mothers, half (12/24) disliked career
mothers and favored the traditional role. Another 7 (29 percent) favored combining
both roles; the remaining 5 (21 percent) favored career women-mothers. But students
overwhelmingly favored a “strong female” for a teacher – and disliked the nurturing
housewives in their texts, finding them out of synch with modern family life.
Zhao (2003) also finds conflicting views of gender roles in English language teaching
materials for junior middle schools. Although both boys and girls are shown in selfchosen activities, the subtle message is that “good girls” shine at home and at school.
Teachers also propagate stereotypes, Song finds in her 2003 study of science
teachers: Fully 71 percent of teachers who read a description of a student with a male

21

name rated him as a good science student, whereas, when the same description was
used but the student was given a female name, only 20 percent of teachers rated her
as a good science student.
The Ford Foundation project also supported a conference in 2001 to present summaries of the
findings. The editors note that some of the audience was skeptical of the extent of gender
transformation the presenters were advocating. But others, they point out, greeted the
interpretations with interest. (They do not report any enthusiastic endorsement.) Finally, the
initiative also resulted in the development of 49 sets of non-biased primary and secondary school
teaching materials, covering 20 subjects. These were pilot tested during the fall of 2002. The
overall findings show, however, that China’s road to eliminate gender bias in textbooks and
curricula will not be a short one, despite an official state policy of achieving gender equity in
education.
B. The Larger-Scale Girls’ Education Interventions Promoted by the World Bank
The Ford Foundation funding produced important empirical results. They clearly document a
problem with gender bias in textbooks at most levels of Chinese education. But the editors’
introductions to the two special issues of Chinese Education and Society convey not even a hint
that any major program or project was to be launched to attack the now-revealed problem. (The
only action outcome seems to be the 49 sets of new teaching materials.) The Ford Foundation is
one of the best-endowed of the major donors but it is the World Bank that is often called the
“500-pound gorilla in the world of development.” What is the Bank’s record like vis-à-vis girls’
education?
Between 1990 and 2005, the World Bank mounted a total of 372 education sector initiatives, on
which it spent well over $25 billion. Just over one-fifth of this was spent on 82 projects with
specific gender components or an exclusively female clientele (Tembon 2007).
Concerning female schooling, no other donor appears to come close. Specifically, two
categories seem to account for most of the expenditures on girls’ education:
(1) “Infrastructure.” This helps increase educational access – and entails mainly
constructing/rehabilitating schools and classrooms, and, to a smaller extent, activities
such as building separate latrines for girls and boys (they help keep girls in school).
(2) “Learning” interventions. These include efforts aimed at (1) increasing the numbers
of female teachers (mostly in places where even primary school teachers are largely
male); (2) curriculum and textbook reform (more relevant to this report); (3) provision of
textbooks and other educational materials, and (4) gender sensitization of personnel. In
the first half of the period, 1990-1997, a higher proportion of the “learning” interventions
were dedicated to increasing female teachers and gender sensitization of personnel. In
the second half, 1998-2005, the proportions aimed at those two categories dropped while
initiatives to provide educational materials rose to take up much of the difference.
In fact, some large-scale education initiatives – including five in Nepal, Bangladesh, Chad,
Guinea and Ghana that totaled over $300 million – had explicit components or activities aimed at
eliminating gender bias from curricula and/or textbooks. Given this scale of effort, it is clear that
22

the extent to which the World Bank continues its special efforts on behalf of girls’ education –
and its specific activities to reduce gender bias in curricula and texts – will have a large footprint.
Next, let us examine some of the paths that have been proposed or taken in various developing
countries to get from studying the problem of gender bias in learning materials and curricula to
actually taking remedial action. Much of the focus here is on Latin America and the Caribbean,
a region that has not received much attention to this point.

23

V. GENDER BIAS IN TEXTBOOKS IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES: DIFFERENT PATHS
FROM STUDIES TO ACTION
To put the problems with gender bias in textbooks and curricula in larger perspective, we already
have seen how widespread this form of sexism turns out to be and how similar its manifestations.
The pace of progress, according to the evidence presented to this point, might be better described
as “snail-like” than speedy. Stromquist (2007) summarizes her many years of studying sexist
bias in learning materials and curricula as follows:
Most evidence from developing regions comes from content analysis of textbooks. The
majority of these studies indicates that there have in fact been efforts to remove sexual
stereotypes from textbooks and that significant changes have occurred in the use of
illustrations and a sex-neutral language; less progress has occurred in the funding and
development of content favorable to the creation of positive identities among women…
(ibid.:36).
The funding issue already has been raised in Section IV. Elsewhere, Stromquist (1997) discusses
funding as part of what she calls “three levels of response” to female inequality in education.
The first level she treats is essentially access and ameliorating the conditions that prevent girls
from physically attending school (e.g., distance, lack of culturally appropriate sanitary facilities,
and absence of flexible scheduling). Governments have proven willing to invest their funds on
access programs, and so have most multilateral and bilateral donors. (In fact, this is the basis of
the “closing the gap” goal of Education for All.) The second level aims to provide females with
the opportunities to reach the same types and levels of education as their male counterparts.
“This would include removing from textbooks sexual stereotypes and images that convey
inferior or passive views of women” (ibid.:60). Here, Stromquist concludes that, quite often,
governments engage in second-level strategies only when supported by international assistance
(ibid.:61). 7
The problem with international assistance is that it tends to come in the form of relatively shortlived projects and one of the lessons learned of development is that the projects function best
when there is strong, committed leadership. When the funding ends or the leader leaves the post,
momentum, and sometimes the gains themselves, are lost. Are there instances where
governments have picked up this “second level” issue of gender bias in texts? What happened?
A. Case Studies of Government Initiatives Concerning Gender Bias in Latin American Texts.
There have been some noteworthy instances in Latin America where government educational
policy or initiatives tried to reduce gender bias in learning materials and curricula. But the four
case studies presented here show a mixed set of outcomes.
-- As described by Muñoz Cabrejo (2006), in 2000, during the Fujimori government, Peru
developed a Plan for Equality of Opportunities for Women and Men (PIO, based on its title in
Spanish). One of the sectors of the PIO involved education and it proposed five objectives. The
fourth called for eradicating sexist content in teaching. The PIO was elaborated by the Women’s
7

The third level is not relevant to this report.

24

Ministry (PROMUDEH) and covered the period 2000-2005. Unfortunately, no working group
ever was constituted to achieve the actions called for in the PIO – including eliminating “sexist
content” in teaching materials. Part of the problem was that the Minister of PROMUDEH who
initiated the plan left. Then, the next Minister of PROMUDEH redesigned the plan in a more
transformative manner (for 2003-2010). This caused Peru’s conservative Catholic Church to
oppose it as a dangerous attack on traditional Peruvian moral values. Soon a third, far more
conservative Minister replaced the one who had redesigned the PIO and aroused the ire of the
Church. Under the third Minister’s watch, all references to a “gender focus” were eliminated in
favor of a focus on the family. In sum, no synergy emerged that moved Peru closer to ending
sexist content in textbooks, curricula and classroom practice. This was despite the fact that the
gender plan aligned with the objectives of the Ministry of Education, as well as the goals of the
various international treaties and conventions Peru had signed on education as well as gender.
-- There are similarities here with Stromquist’s analysis (1997:81) involving gender and
education in Argentina. In 1992, a new education law introduced the principle of equal
opportunity and the elimination of “discriminatory stereotypes in educational materials.” The
initiative was under the National Program for the Promotion of Women’s Equal Opportunities in
Education (PRIOM). PRIOM revised the curricula at primary and secondary levels to include
gender content (e.g., women whose contributions might not have been included in previous
learning materials), as well as a critical examination of gender-based discrimination and social
practices (Bonder 1994:19, cited in Stromquist 1997:82). But just as the curriculum was going
to be disseminated at the national level after extensive pilot-testing, it was attacked by
conservative parents supported by the Catholic Church. PRIOM was criticized as being antifamily and the government finally adopted a gender-neutral curriculum advocated by the Church.
-- In Brazil, there are a number of “cross-connections” between gender policies and education
policies involving textbooks and curricula. For example, the 2001 National Education Plan
(PNE) mandated by the constitution mentions gender only in certain specific points but textbook
stereotypes is one of them: if a text contains gender or race/ethnicity stereotypes, it is considered
discriminatory (Vianna and Unbehaum 2006:136-137). Previously, in 1995-1997, Brazil had
adopted “National Curriculum Parameters” (PCN) and, unlike the cases in Peru and Argentina, a
gender focus was included without controversy – although it seems to have been interpreted
largely in terms of sexual orientation. In any event, gender was to be a cross-cutting issue
throughout the curricula adopted by states and municipalities.
The PCN stressed textbooks as critically important in Brazilian education, and the Ministry of
Education (MEC) reviewed studies of how women appeared in those books. The MEC research
concluded that “various analyses have demonstrated that in the majority of the textbooks…the
woman is presented only as a housewife and mother, while the man participates in the world of
work beyond the household and never appears in situations of affection with his children or
doing housework” – and that this clearly constrained what roles each gender was to play (MEC
1997, Vol. 1, p. 104; in Vianna and Unbehaum 2006:172; material in quotes is my translation).
Finally, Chapter 2 of the 2004 National Plan of Policies for Women (which also addressed race)
is entitled, “Inclusive, Non-Sexist Education.” One of its five objectives is to guarantee a nondiscriminatory education system that does not reproduce stereotypes based on gender, race and

25

ethnicity. It also calls for textbooks to be free of discriminatory content based on gender, race,
ethnicity and sexual orientation. Despite all these “cross-connections,” no data were found citing
a (resulting) decline in gender bias in texts and/or curricula.
-- Araya (2006) presents a detailed case study of Costa Rica government initiatives to promote
gender equity. These include attempts to reduce gender bias in texts as well as to change malefemale enrollment patterns in gender-stereotyped curricula. Initially, national laws and policies
made no reference to gender and education (e.g., the 1949 Constitution’s Title VII on “Education
and Culture”). But by the 1990s, this had changed: gender discrimination was mentioned as
something to be eliminated. By this time, also, laws had been passed specifying and
guaranteeing explicit human rights for women (e.g., the 1995 Law against Sexual Harassment in
Employment and Teaching).
In fact, Costa Rica ratified CEDAW in 1984. Its Article 10 calls for the elimination of all
stereotypes concerning masculine and feminine roles at all levels and forms of education. But
not a single concrete action followed from the ratification. It wasn’t for a lack of data: Araya
(2006) notes that in 1987 Andree Michel had developed a methodology for analyzing gender
bias/stereotyped images in textbooks. It stimulated a series of studies over the next six years that
documented the prevalence of gender stereotypes in teaching materials. These analyses also
showed that it was necessary to eliminate the sexist language that was found to be endemic.
Some progress was made during the late 1980s-1990s: the notoriously sexist Paco y Lola
readers were eliminated from public primary schools and have become increasingly rare in
private ones. Other textbooks were modified to increase representation of females and somewhat
reduce sexist portrayals. But often the changes were “timid” (Araya 2006:180) because the
textbooks in question passed through multiple departments, offices, consultants, etc. Thus, an
illustration of a woman cultivator might well end up as an illustration of a man cultivator. The
new series, “Toward the 21st Century,” was supposed to (1) eliminate language and illustrations
that reinforced stereotyped gender roles, and (2) be made compulsory. But, Araya notes, it failed
to be widely distributed. This was because of a Supreme Court resolution granting relief to a
group of publishers who claimed that the mandatory adoption violated laws of free competition.
Araya cites a 2002 assessment from INAMU (Araya 2006:181) that ascertained that despite the
reforms and changes in teaching materials, many of the textbooks available on the market
continued to devalue women and use stereotyped roles, images and language.
In general, Araya found, lofty goals and statements have been far more numerous than actual
implementation. Her conclusion is based on her analysis of the 21 components of the new Action
Plan for promoting a culture of gender equity in education. Her research revealed that only
several components were even on the path to implementation. For example, the production and
use of teaching materials with a gender focus was being considered by the High Council of
Education. In fact, some of these materials had been produced – but their distribution still was
dependent on overcoming a lack of sufficient budget. Also, a pilot program aimed at reducing
gender bias in education (e.g., encouraging female and male students to choose non-stereotyped
courses of study in technical schools) actually was launched for a year or two. But there seems
not to have been any monitoring and evaluation.

26

In sum, Araya concludes, gender failed to be institutionalized in the public sector, including
education, in the 1980s and 1990s. It was not for a lack of plans, projects, objectives and other
initiatives. Rather, two factors are almost always mentioned among the reasons: when a
dedicated leader who had promoted the program in question left her/his post, and/or when
funding for the special initiative – often from international sources ranging from UNESCO to the
European Union – ended, the initiative soon fizzled out.
~
To conclude this heading, all the case study authors note that the continued implementation of
the various actions promoting gender equity in education that they analyze depends on the
availability of resources and the preservation of these policies by subsequent governments. It
would seem that government support for a “second level” issue such as gender bias in learning
materials is precarious for various reasons. Continued funding always seems to be one of them.
B. More Research on Gender Bias in Textbooks in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Given the strength of the feminist movement in most countries in both Latin America and the
Caribbean, it is not surprising that a considerable amount of content research on gender bias in
textbooks has been carried out in the region. The findings are worth reviewing for two reasons.
On the one hand, some of the Latin American studies are not the work of activists: they seem to
have been generated by just the sort of “second level” support that is discussed above (and that
paid for the Chinese research discussed in Section IV). On the other hand, there is one intriguing
exception in the Caribbean to the otherwise almost carbon-copy results found in all the research
discussed to this point: one author’s books that feature strong women.
In Latin America, a number of studies have found the usual patterns of gender bias in textbooks
from the 1970s into the new millennium. Perhaps the earliest study was in Chile (Magendoza
1970 – a year before the publication of the content analyses by the U.S. activist U’Ren and the
academic historian Trecker); another study in Chile was by Ochoa (1983; it seems that both
Magendoza and Ochoa are men). Also in the Southern Cone, Wainerman and Barck (1984)
carried out a detailed analysis in Argentina (see also Stromquist 1992a).
Stromquist 1989a:164 discusses some UNESCO-sponsored studies that included Peru (Anderson
and Herencia 1983), as well as Zambia (Tembo 1984). She also mentions a study in Brazil by
Pinto (1982) and a 1979 Colombia study by Silva “notable for its exhaustive analysis.”
More recently, as mentioned above, Araya (2006:176) notes Michel’s 1987 development of a
content analysis methodology for researching the incidence of stereotyped images. This
methodology inspired a number of studies, including Gonzalez (1990) and Montes de Oca y
Rosales (1993).
Then in 1991, UNIFEM launched a sub-regional project for Central America that was aimed at
producing teaching materials free of gender stereotypes. It resulted in various studies that
proposed different ways of reducing sexism in primary education (e.g., Paredes et al., 1994;
Centro Nacional para el Desarrollo de la Mujer y la Familia 1997; Ibarra 1997, and see also
UNICEF/UNIFEM 1990).

27

Finally, studies of gender bias in textbooks have continued to be done in Latin America after the
turn of the millennium, including Araya (2001) in Costa Rica and Beisiegel (2001) in Brazil. In
short, in contrast to the United States, where few recent quantitative content analyses were
encountered, this research tradition seems to be on-going in Latino countries.
Turning to the Caribbean, boys’ secondary school completion rates lag behind girls’ in much of
the region and it even has been claimed that teachers favor girls, to boys’ disadvantage. But the
women in these countries experience the usual occupational segregation and wage gap found
elsewhere. Are their textbooks also in keeping with world patterns?
Bailey (2003) examined the educational system in Jamaica in terms of gender sensitivity and also
reported on earlier studies that had explicitly studied gender bias in textbooks in the region:
•
•

•

•
•

King and Morrissey (1988) analyzed 20 Caribbean secondary school textbooks in
history, geography and social studies. They found that women were invisible in most of
the texts and relegated to subordinate or menial roles when they did appear.
Two different authors analyzed literature texts in 1989. Ayodike found few images that
challenged the prevailing stereotypes of females; to the contrary, damaging concepts of
women were being projected. But Pollard found that books written by one particular
author defied the pattern and conveyed the strength, wisdom and courage associated with
Caribbean women. (In fact, Caribbean women long have been known for economic
autonomy as well as, more recently, for gender parity in education.) Still, this is a very
rare finding.
Bailey also discussed one of her own studies (Bailey and Parkes 1995), which covered
language arts texts used in Jamaican primary schools. It showed that not only were both
girls and women underrepresented in these books, but that both males and females were
depicted in traditionally gender-stereotyped behaviors.
Whitely published a study of science texts in 1996. His results showed the usual
imbalance of adults in the illustrations, favoring males, but a gender balance among
young people depicted.
The most recent study in Bailey’s review (Drayton 1997) examined Caribbean English
textbooks and found not only patriarchal, but also Eurocentric, bias.

In other words, all books analyzed, bar those of one author, showed an almost identical pattern of
gender bias that marginalizes girls and women. Results such as these make the case for an
impact study of gender bias in textbooks quite compelling. For example, would strong female
students in the Caribbean have gone farther occupationally, and ended up in less genderstereotyped fields had they not been subtly affected by gender bias in textbooks and curricula?
The only evidence unearthed so far about the effects of such bias involves a more male-dominant
society than those of the Caribbean and does not extend beyond teachers’ attitudes and conduct.
Specifically, Kenyan results reported by Lloyd (2005) show that girls were more harmed by
teachers’ gender bias. In addition, Lloyd et al. 2000 had found that indicators of teachers’
negative treatment of girls were linked to a higher dropout rate for Kenyan girls but not for boys
(even when controlling for family variables and measures of school quality). More generally, a

28

study by Appleton (1995) found girls were adversely affected by negative teacher attitudes
toward them but that boys were not. Would impact studies that focused on gender bias in
textbooks reveal similar patterns? If so, would these be worldwide or country-specific?
The final section (VII. Conclusions and Recommendations) will discuss the need for impact
studies of the sort that would answer the intriguing “so what?” question about the effects of
biased learning materials and treatment on females’ futures. To conclude the present section,
however, let us discuss an author who has found ways to neutralize the potentially harmful
impact on girls of even the most biased learning materials.
C. A Study of Gender Bias in Indian Textbooks and Grassroots Exercises to Counter It
Kalia (1986) has produced an apparently unique study by combining a quantitative content
analysis of textbooks used in Indian schools with “you can do something about it” exercises.
These exercises can be carried out by students, teachers and even parents. Earlier, in 1979, she
had content-analyzed 21 English and 20 Hindi texts used by students throughout five of the most
populous places in Northern India (the most patriarchal region in the country): Haryana, Punjab,
Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and Delhi (Kalia 1979). Under India’s centralized system, the texts had
been prepared by one of two agencies: NCERT (the National Council of Educational Research
and Training) and the Central Board of Secondary Education.
The content analysis, also discussed in her 1986 book, shows the usual pattern: men were the
dominant figures in 75 percent of the lessons, and fully 87 percent of the biographies (47/54)
were of men. Male-exclusive language was used to signify all of humanity. Worse, “men
routinely abused and violently beat women in many lessons” (1986:2). Of 465 occupations in
the texts, women were completely excluded from 344 (74 percent). She argues that this “hidden
curriculum” in textbooks molds children’s gender-related values, especially if reinforced by the
teacher.
Each later chapter then tackles a particular aspect of the sexism found in textbooks: (1) language,
(2) stereotyping as a form of sexism that permeates many spheres of life, (3) sex role imagery,
and (4) occupational roles. Each chapter also is replete with exercises that can be done jointly by
a teacher and her/his students, or by any other reader. The exercises are too numerous to make
this a reader-friendly volume but the basic idea of turning biased material on its head by easily
posed questions or easily undertaken activities harks back to the “do it yourself” activism of the
1970s students and educators who confronted the large states and the principal publishers in the
U.S. on the issue of sexist textbooks. They did it “on a shoestring.” So can Kalia’s readers.
In summary, in this section we have seen (1) partial attempts by governments in Latin America
to deal with the problem of gender bias in textbooks and curricula, (2) the further documentation
of that bias by numerous content analysis studies in the Latin America/Caribbean region in a
continuing tradition, and (3) an Indian study that combined content analysis with suggestions on
how to confront it without funding from anyone. There is one region, however, where the
government, the educational establishment and the activists long have been “all on the same
page” – and willing to commit resources and time to getting rid of gender bias in the curricula,
the textbooks and the classroom: the Nordic nations.

29

VI. THE BEST “BIAS BUSTERS”? SWEDEN AND OTHER NORDIC NATIONS
Stromquist (2007:36) argues that the “Nordic countries have been successful in decreasing male
stereotypes and improving male parenting skills through various school interventions – an effort
that has taken place over close to four decades.” Sweden leads in this and is our main focus here.
The taken-for-granted status of an egalitarian curriculum is clear, especially in Sweden. Eilard
(2004, English summary) studied the construction of gender and ethnicity in a new reader used in
the first grade of a Swedish multi-ethnic comprehensive school. The main characters, a girl and
a boy, are shown interacting with other children, apparently of other ethnic backgrounds. Eilard
comments that “the book’s tomboy…is negatively stereotyped in contrast to ‘normal’ girls. She
sees the female protagonist taking a “traditional feminine role,” although she doesn’t clarify the
particulars. What she does specify is that:
The position of the boys is more flexible and open to variation than…the girls. The boys
are allowed to be childish and soft, while the girls tend to be encouraged to [grow up].
Since this would seem to go against all the stereotypes of males discussed to this point, it is quite
noteworthy. So, too, is her description of the Swedish curriculum as explicitly promoting gender
equity. She concludes that the first grade reader’s well-intended message of diversity
nevertheless contains “an implicit educative message including a Eurocentric as well as an
androcentric order. Certain parts of the text actually contradict the vision of equality as
articulated in the Swedish curriculum” (emphasis added).
There may even be a form of deliberate anti-stereotyping in some textbooks, if a study by
Carlson (2007) is any indication. She examines “images and values in textbook and practice” in
language courses for Turkish immigrants to Sweden (ibid.:125). In a section entitled, “Gender
Equality – ‘Swedish’ and ‘Turkish’ Perspectives,” she discusses the “norm of gender equality”:
There actually are no explicit texts in the textbooks pertaining to this sensitive issue.
Instead, a norm of “Swedish” gender equality appears more indirectly, for example in
descriptions of the division of labor within a family or in descriptions of who works with
what in a workplace. The most obvious hints about “equal distribution” in everyday life
are perhaps to be found in illustrations of various domestic tasks. A quite common
picture of “the modern man” is of a man wearing an apron while standing at the stove
stirring pots or doing house-cleaning. Wellros (1995) reacted in an article to what she
calls “ideologically arranged pictures in [language course text] books.” She maintains
that statistics concerning the division of labor in Swedish homes point to a completely
different picture from that presented in the textbooks (ibid.:136, emphasis added).
In a nutshell, some textbooks are intentionally going beyond the patterns of Sweden’s relatively
gender-egalitarian everyday life. Social science studies do show higher levels of male
participation in domestic activities (particularly in Sweden) than in non-Nordic countries. But to
what extent do texts go beyond many readers’ lived experience in order to meld the genderegalitarian curriculum with explicitly anti-sexist didactic materials? The question remains open.

30

A new draft paper co-authored by a Norwegian and an Australian provides a broader historical
perspective. According to Nielsen and Davies (2007), “From Rousseau to the 1950s gender
differentiation had been an explicit goal of education.” Then, until the early 1970s [and,
implicitly, the rise of the “second wave women’s movement”], there was a generation when
“boys” and “girls” became “children” or “students,” but – implicitly – these kids were “generic
males.” The few pre-1970 studies focusing on gender in classroom interaction criticized female
teachers for failing to meet the learning needs of boys effectively (Brophy 1985). “During the
1970s, feminist researchers began to make girls visible in the classroom” (Nielsen and Davies).
Then, the authors argue, in the 1980s and 1990s, “the focus shifted from analyses of inequality
produced through differential treatment and double standards in the classroom to a focus on the
active role children themselves play in constructing gendered worlds” (ibid.). The most recent
research, while showing the “relative stability in boys and girls’ gender stereotypes and peer
relations” (ibid.), now also considers the “new” active girl who does not lose her self-confidence
at adolescence (Nielsen 2004). 8
Sweden, however, goes much farther. A 2004 study of Sweden by O’Dowd shows that, in many
respects, its record vis-à-vis gender does seem to be quite different from that of other developed
countries. Why? First of all, its commitment to egalitarian relations, including gender equality,
goes back to the late 1930s, when a Keynesian economic policy, called the “Swedish model” by
its best-known architect, Gunnar Myrdal, was formulated. In 1939, a bill was passed
“guaranteeing women the right to their jobs even after marriage and prohibiting employers from
firing them on the grounds of pregnancy” (ibid.). Still, this participation took place in a “rigidly
gender segregated labor market” (Wikander 1992:201, cited in O’Dowd).
Hirdman (1992, cited in O’Dowd) has traced three eras with respect to gender relations during
the last century of Swedish history: the pre-World War II “housewife contract,” the “equality
contract” of the heyday of the “Swedish model” (of a fast-growing welfare state), and the “equal
standing” (jamstalldhet) model that emerged in the 1970s as growth slowed and Sweden
increasingly tilted toward a market economy. A number of feminists have argued that the
consensual/cooperative/conflict-avoiding climate that accompanied this merely has served to
make “male dominance in society less visible.” Yet even the “housewife contract” permitted
young, working single women to be men’s equals until they married, gave birth, and then took
primary responsibility for home and hearth. The years of the “equality contract” led to
widespread expansion of day-care facilities, changing attitudes to marriage and an increase in
divorces (Hirdman 1992:215 in O’Dowd).
Still, even in Sweden gender equality is not universal. Since 1976, the slower-growth “equal
standing” contract has led to two very different patterns. On the one hand, despite the egalitarian
emphasis of the curriculum – and those textbooks showing male domesticity – education and the
8

It is an interesting manifestation of the gender stratification system in the United States that the new (1990spresent) discourse and studies concerning failing boys “has aroused much more immediate attention than the
discourse of silent and insecure girls in the 1970s and 80s” (ibid.). In the U.S. discussion of “failing boys,” female
teachers are again getting a good share of the blame, just as they did in the pre-1970s studies.

31

workforce remain gender-segregated. Males and females study different subjects and work in
different careers and venues – in particular, females are more concentrated in the public sector.
On the other hand, the high proportion of women in Parliament (47.3 percent according to IPU
2007) and the Cabinet (~40 percent) presents a more egalitarian face.
To some extent then, the gender-stereotyped side of Swedish education has survived in a country
that has embraced gender equality as government policy longer than other European nations.
“Here the hidden curriculum, sex stereotyping, preferential treatment, authoritarian teaching
models and higher expectations for boys have their impact” (Stromquist 1992b, in O’Dowd).
All in all, what seems to be emerging is an educational system where the curriculum has been
reformulated in a gender egalitarian manner and many textbooks have been written to promote a
vision of even more equality and less gender-stereotyped domestic and occupational roles than
most Swedes encounter in their own lives. To Swedish critics, the glass of gender equality is
half empty; to those from more patriarchal countries, it is more than half full – it indeed may be
seen as positively brimming.
Finally, what does the latest version of the Swedish curriculum (2006) say about gender
equality? First, “equality between men and women” is right near the top of values, just behind
“the inviolability of human life, individual freedom and integrity, and the equal value of all
people” (Sweden 2006:3). Second, the curriculum proclaims, “No one should be subjected to
discrimination at school based on gender…” (ibid.). Later, it states that:
the school should actively and consciously further equal rights and opportunities for men
and women…The school has a responsibility to counteract traditional gender roles
(ibid.:4, emphasis added)
In addition, the curriculum exhorts that all who work in the school should “work…against any
restrictions on the pupil’s choice of study or vocation that are based on gender” (ibid:16).
In sum, the official Swedish curriculum promotes a more gender egalitarian world than that
revealed by national statistics showing labor force sex segregation and analyses showing subtle
gender stereotyping still lurking in some textbooks. Even if the gist of most remaining textbook
stereotypes seems to reflect world patterns, what we have here is a different level of intensity.
Sweden might be on a different planet to a girl in Balochistan Province, Pakistan or in Djibouti
or one of the other places where female rights of access to education still are hotly contested by
large and influential proportions of the most powerful males. 9
9

But before concluding this section, it is worth summarizing one study that actually found apparently greater gender
stereotyping in a Nordic country than in America. Specifically, Finnish basic readers were more gender biased than
those from the United States (Hyona et al. 1995). The study is a classic quantitative content analysis that analyzed
12 Finnish and 18 U.S. primers for grades 3-6. Surprisingly, it shows greater gender bias and stereotyping of male
and female traits for the Finnish case. There turns out to be a reason, however: the Finnish readers included a much
higher proportion of stories drawn from traditional folk tales dating back to the 1800s, set in a rural milieu where
male and female roles in agricultural and domestic labor were clearly cut from the old gender-segregated mold. In
contrast, the stories in the 18 American readers the authors analyzed were written especially for those volumes,
“with an emphasis on a balanced view of gender roles.” As a final conundrum, we are left to ponder if this differing
selection of materials was due to the higher proportion of male authors found in the Finnish readers.

32

VII. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
A. Conclusions
1. In summary, this paper looks beyond girls’ educational access to an issue that may well
affect educational gender equality – and hence timely fulfillment of the EFA and MDG
goals: gender bias in textbooks (and curricula).
2. The paper contends that though gender bias in learning materials is less dramatic an issue
than getting girls into schools for the first time, it is consequential: textbooks take up the
lion’s share of class time for both teachers and students and reflect a nation’s curricula.
3. Yet the gender bias in textbooks is hidden in plain sight. Their stereotypes of males and
females are camouflaged by the taken-for-granted system of gender stratification and roles.
4. Thus far, the biggest surprise is not finding any impact studies of the effects of this form of
sexism on girls – and boys’ – patterns of educational and subsequent occupational
achievement. Therefore, we have no way of knowing just how big an obstacle gender bias in
learning materials and curricula actually may be. We don’t know if it more strongly affects
those in poorer countries, with weaker school systems, or not. We just don’t know.
5. We do know, however, exactly what the sexist bias consists of. Specifically, this paper has
examined the relentlessly similar picture revealed by studies of gender bias in textbooks (and
curricula) all around the world. Here are some relevant points that have emerged from the
content analyses of textbooks since the early 1970s, and the present overview study:
First, with respect to prevalence, gender bias in textbooks proves to be more widespread
geographically than the remaining gender gap in parity. It also is found in countries at all
levels of economic development and at all levels of gender equality, as measured by
indicators such as the UN Gender Development Index (GDI).
Second, concerning persistence, despite over 35 years of efforts in many nations, gender
bias in textbooks will not soon vanish. “Second generation” studies mostly reveal a nearglacial pace of change.
Third, and significantly, these re-studies don’t measure relative intensity, which may be
diminishing faster than the prevalence of sexist learning materials. Research on intensity
seems called for in future studies/restudies of gender bias in textbooks.
Fourth, vis-à-vis content, the uniformity is breathtaking: (a) under-representation of
females, (b) use of male words to mean all of humanity, (c) traditional gender stereotypes
about the activities of males and females in the occupational sphere and in the domestic
sphere, (d) traditional stereotypes about the traits and activities of males and females, and
so on. And one finds them, in strikingly similar form, on every continent.

33

Fifth, with respect to change – one of the most defining characteristics of a world marked
by globalization, rising uncertainty, exponential rates of technological innovation and
rising rates of women earning income (Blumberg 1995) – the big news is that it is largely
absent in the world of gender-biased learning materials. In particular, most textbooks
largely (or wholly) ignore all the changes in women’s position in recent decades:
• One could never guess any country’s actual female (vs. male) labor force
participation rate or its distribution of occupations by gender from reading the
textbooks in its schools.
• One would have no inkling of women’s rise in (1) income and resulting
empowerment (Blumberg 1984, 1988, 2005); (2) organization and activism, and (3)
community involvement – despite the fact that these things are happening worldwide.
Sixth, with respect to the rate of amelioration of gender bias, it may be described as
generally very slow. But this doesn’t take into account several significant developments:
• The survival and spread of research about gender bias in textbooks, mostly content
analyses, with some of it done by activists “on their own nickel;”
• Lobbying campaigns by women’s organizations and feminist activists – some of them
the same people who did the content analyses – to eliminate this form of sexism.
o These campaigns have attempted to pressure those who produce and/or
purchase the books to commit to standards that eliminate, at minimum, the
most blatant bias.
o While this paper has focused on such campaigns mainly in the U.S. and,
secondarily, in Latin America, they also can be found in Sub-Saharan Africa
(e.g., FAWE) and parts of Asia (e.g., the Philippines).
o But, for the most part, donor initiatives to end gender bias in textbooks have
not reached out to these women’s organizations.
6. Another sort of conclusion involves the funding needed to go beyond merely identifying and
describing gender bias in textbooks to attempting to reform the whole learning materials/
curricular system. Often, this is beyond the reach of a poor country – unless it is involved in
a major regime change or has obtained support from a major donor, such as the World Bank.
(In fact, it is problematic that without Ford Foundation funding, the Chinese research
identifying and delineating the parameters of gender bias in textbooks would have been
carried out in as integrated and comprehensive a fashion as proved to be the case.)
7. Yet, up until now, many of the lessons learned from donor funding of education (including
girls’ education) have been lost, due to inadequate monitoring and evaluation. All too often,
gender-disaggregated statistics are absent, so any conclusions are, of necessity, gender-blind.
8. There is clearly a need for donor efforts to continue with respect to gender bias in textbooks
and curricula. But there is also a need for the donors to divide tasks on the basis of their own
comparative advantage and resource availability. Activities such as supporting descriptive
research about gender bias in learning materials and curricula are much less capital-intensive
than sizeable interventions to transform them. But donors’ efforts would be enhanced if they
also reached out to the researchers and women’s organizations which are committed to the
issue. Already, many of these people and NGOs have developed and tested non-sexist pilot

34

modules. Others have created exercises that teachers, students, activists, and/or interested
parents could carry out to better understand the bias and start to combat it (e.g., the activities
found in Kalia 1986).
9. One possible “win-win” outcome would entail these researchers and organizations becoming
involved in monitoring and evaluation of donor initiatives vis-à-vis gender biased learning
materials and curricula. After all, this is their area of expertise, and they could work with a
donor technical expert if a more sophisticated methodology were needed. One definite
bonus: they would never forget to disaggregate all their people data by gender – an all-toocommon failing in larger education projects that include gender components.
10. Based on the case studies of government efforts in Latin America, another conclusion echoes
that of Stromquist, so it is appropriate to quote her version (2007:40):
The evidence suggests that insufficient work is occurring in most national educational
systems to modify curriculum content, textbooks, and teachers’ skills and understanding
of gender issues. [Institutions such as governments and conservative religious
hierarchies] are reluctant to alter curriculum and practices [toward greater gender equity].
[But] despite the weak attention to gender equity in schooling, it may represent the
strongest source of counter messages to traditional norms learned in the family,
community, and national media.
B. Recommendations
1. It is recommended that, after decades, it is time to move beyond studies that describe gender
bias in textbooks to research that evaluates the level and type of impact of such bias on
females – and males.
2. It is further recommended that this impact research can be carried out with varied techniques
that measure various types of outcomes at different points in the educational cycle.
• Obvious outcomes are completion and transition rates for primary-secondary and
secondary-tertiary education, disaggregated not only by gender but also by other relevant
planes of cleavage within a nation (rural-urban, social class, race-ethnicity, religion, etc.).
• There also should be cross-national studies comparing nations at varying development
levels as well as degrees of gender inequality (as measured by GDI, GEM, sex ratio, etc.).
• “Quasi-experimental designs” (Campbell 1966) and “natural experiments” could be
useful, too. A development project, for example, could add an initiative to combat
gender bias in textbooks in one site/region. Later, educational impact (disaggregated by
gender) could be assessed, contrasting the site that got the component with those that
didn’t. (This would require that the quasi-experimental and quasi-control sites be similar
in relevant background variables and did not differ on other project components they
received.)
3. An additional recommendation about research is aimed at content analysis, the main
technique used to study gender bias in textbooks. We suggest that measures of intensity of the
biases (e.g., the stereotypes, derogatory depictions of women, violence meted out to females for

35

violating traditional gender norms, etc.) also be added to such research. This might be especially
useful in assessing progress in a “second generation” study, or in measuring differences between
more and less gender-unequal societies (e.g., Saudi Arabia vs. Sweden).
4. The final research-related recommendation concerns making sure that there is adequate,
gender-disaggregated monitoring and evaluation of any intervention designed to ameliorate
gender bias in textbooks and/or curricula.
• It is further recommended that donors reach out to researchers and women’s
organizations already involved in this content area and incorporate them into the
monitoring and evaluation efforts.
5. The first recommendation without a research component is that donors should reach out to
these women’s NGOs and researchers in their intervention efforts as well. These are the people
who often have developed non-sexist materials and curricula; they could provide their expertise
in both project design and implementation phases. To date this has been a missed opportunity.
6. There is evidence that teachers’ attitudes often tend to be more unfavorable toward girls than
boys, and their treatment of girl students more negative – especially in relatively gender-unequal
countries. Therefore it is recommended that donors consider innovative, inexpensive ways to
provide them with increased gender sensitivity training.
• It is further recommended that the place to start this gender sensitization is during
teacher training.
• Therefore, it is recommended that wherever teacher training includes some form of
practice teaching, exercises of the sort designed in such profusion by Kalia (1986) be
incorporated into their training. This would mean that even if the curriculum were not
changed one iota, teachers would have the ability to “stand it on its head” vis-à-vis
gender bias by means of some of the easy exercises she (and others) have proposed.
7. Moreover, it is recommended that as countries succeed in achieving gender parity in
enrollments, i.e., succeed at access, they should be encouraged to tackle – and monitor and
evaluate – “second level” problems, such as gender bias in textbooks and curricula.
8. Since the amount of funding for content analysis studies of gender bias is only a fraction of
the funding needed to mount a systematic attack on the problem, and different donors specialize
in “different parts of the elephant,” it is recommended that there be a donor coordination effort,
perhaps chaired by EFA professional leadership, to better allocate the various tasks entailed in
identifying/describing vs. ameliorating gender bias in textbooks and curricula.
9. Finally, it is recommended that reductions in the intensity of gender bias in textbooks be
considered as a useful indicator of gender equity in society. Stromquist (2007:36) now calls for
using decreases in gender stereotypes in learning materials for this purpose. The combination of
both might prove even better.

36

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Ahmed, Firoz Bakht. 2006. “Male Bias in School Texts.” The Tribune Online Edition.
Chandigarh, India (Feb. 26). http://www.tribuneindia.com
Alrabaa, Sami. 1985. “Sex Division of Labor in Syrian School Textbooks.” International
Review of Education 31(3):335-348.
American Association of University Women. 1992. How Schools Shortchange Women. New
York: Marlowe.
Ames, Patricia, ed. 2006. Las brechas invisibles: Desafíos para una equidad de género en la
educación. Lima, Peru: IEP, Instituto de Estudios Peruanos.
Anderson, David and Mykol C. Hamilton. 2005. “Gender Role Stereotyping of Parents in
Children’s Picture Books: The Invisible Father.” Sex Roles: A Journal of Research 53(3-4):145152.
Anderson, Jeanine and Christina Herencia. 1983. L’image de la femme et de l’homme dans les
livres scolaires peruviens. Paris: UNESCO.
Appleton, Simon. 1995. Exam Performance in Kenyan Primary Schools: Determinants and
Gender Differences. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.
Araya, Sandra. 2001. La equidad de género desde la representación de las formadoras y los
formadores del profesorado de enseñanza secundaria. San Pedro, Costa Rica: Universidad de
Costa Rica, tesis de doctorado.
________. 2006. “El género en la acción estatal de Costa Rica. Una mirada desde las políticas
educativas.” Pp. 167-220 in La construcción del género en las políticas públicas: Perspectivas
comparadas desde América Latina, edited by Nelly P. Stromquist. Lima, Peru: IEP, Instituto de
Estudios Peruanos.
Arlow, P. and M. Froschl. 1976. “Women in the High School Curriculum: A Review of U.S.
History and English Literature Texts.” In High School Feminist Studies, edited by Florence
Howe. Old Westbury, NY: Feminist Press.
Ayodike, T. 1989. “Images of Women in Selected CXC Literature.” Paper presented at Gender
and Education Seminar. Faculty of Education and Women and Development Studies, University
of the West Indies, Mona, Jamaica.
Bailey, B. and L. Parkes. 1995. “Gender: The Not So Hidden Issue in Language Arts Materials
Used in Jamaica.” Journal of Caribbean Studies 17(2):265-278.
Bailey, Barbara. 2003. “Gender-Sensitive Educational Policy and Practice; The Case of
Jamaica.” Paper for the Education for All Global Monitoring Report. UNESCO, April.

37

Baldwin, P. and D. Baldwin. 1992. “The Portrayal of Women in Classroom Textbooks.”
Canadian Social Studies 26(3):110-114.
Beisiegel, Celso. 2001. “Educaçao e valores democráticos.” Pp. 13-62 in Cultura e democracia,
vol. 2, edited by José Moisés et al. Rio de Janeiro: Fundo Nacional de Cultura.
Benavot, Aaron. 2007. Telephone Interview, March 9, 2007.
Birkhill, P. 1996. Textbooks as an Agent of Change: Gender Aspects of Primary School
Textbooks in Mozambique, Zambia and Zimbabwe. Stockholm: Swedish International
Development Agency, Education Division.
Black, Linda Jones. 2006. “Textbooks, Gender, and World History.” World History
Connected 3(2). http://www.historycooperative.org
Blankenship, G. and C.L. Hahn. 1982. “Sex Bias in Georgia High School Economics
Textbooks.” Georgia Social Science Journal 13:1-3.
Blumberg, Rae Lesser. 1984. “A General Theory of Gender Stratification.” Sociological Theory
2:23-101; also published as pp. 23-101 in Sociological Theory 1984, ed. by Randall Collins. San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
_________. 1988. “Income Under Female vs. Male Control.” Journal of Family Issues 9:51-84.
_________. 1989. Making the Case for the Gender Variable: Women and the Wealth and WellBeing of Nations. Washington, D.C.: Agency for International Development/Office of Women in
Development.
_________. 1995. “Engendering Wealth and Well-being in an Era of Economic
Transformation.” Pp. 1-14 in Engendering Wealth and Well-being: Empowerment for Global
Change, edited by Rae Lesser Blumberg, Cathy A. Rakowski, Irene Tinker and Michael
Monteon. Boulder CO: Westview Press.
_________. 2005. “Women’s Economic Empowerment as the ‘Magic Potion’ of
Development?” Paper presented at the annual meetings of the American Sociological
Association, Philadelphia, August, and UNESCO, Paris, October.
________. 2006. “How Mother’s Economic Activities and Empowerment Affect Early
Childhood Care and Education for Boys and Girls. Paris: UNESCO, October. Background paper
for 2007 UNESCO Education for All Global Monitoring Report, Strong Foundations: Early
Childhood Care and Education. (electronic version 2007/ED/EFA/MRT/PI/6).
________ and Laura Holian. 2004. “Who’s Educated? Who’s Allowed to Live? Accounting
for Variations in Education and Sex Ratios.” Paper presented at the annual meetings of the
American Sociological Association, San Francisco, August.

38

Bonder, G. 1994. “From Theory to Action: Reflections on a Women’s Equal Opportunities
Educational Policy.” Paper prepared for an Expert Group meeting on gender, education, and
training. UN: Division for the Advancement of Women, October, cited in Nelly P. Stromquist,
1997, Increasing Girls’ and Women’s Participation in Basic Education. Paris: UNESCO,
International Institute for Educational Planning, p. 82.
Brophy, J. 1985. “Interactions of Male and Female Students with Male and Female Teachers.”
In Gender Influences in Classroom Interaction, edited by L. C. Wilkinson and C. B. Marrett.
Orlando: Academic Press.
Burger, Carol, Gypsy Abbot, Sheila Tobias, Janice Koch, Christine Vogt with Lisa Bievenue,
Dolores Carlito, Teri Sosa, and Candace Strawn. 2007. “Gender Equity in Science, Engineering,
and Technology.” Pp. 255-279 in Handbook for Achieving Gender Equity Through Education,
edited by Susan S. Klein et al. 2nd edition. Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Cairns, Joyce and Bill Inglis. 1989. “A Content Analysis of Ten Popular History Textbooks for
Primary Schools with Particular Emphasis on the Role of Women.” Education Review
41(3):221-226
Campbell, Donald T. 1966. Experimental and Quasi-experimental Design. New York: Rand
McNally.
Carlson, Marie. 2007. “Images and Values in Textbook and Practice: Language Courses for
Immigrants in Sweden.” Pp. 125-142 in Education in ‘Multicultural’ Societies – Turkish and
Swedish Perspectives, edited by Marie Carlson, Annika Rabo and Fatma Gok. Swedish Research
Institute in Istanbul. Also in Transactions, 18:125-142.
Carlsson, Maj Asplund. “Ett urval pulikationer 1991-2003.” Publications from
http://www.maj.asplund.carlsson@lit.gu.se
Centro Nacional para el Desarrollo de la Mujer y la Familia. 1997. “Primer, Segundo y Tercer
Módulo.” San Jose, Costa Rica: El Centro.
Chen, Ping and Weiling Chen. 2002. “Separated by One Layer of Paper: Some Views about the
Inferior Position of Girls in the Study of Elementary School Arithmetic.” Chinese Education and
Society 35(5)(September-October):14-22.
Child, Irvin L., Elmer H. Potter and Estelle M. Levine. 1960. “Children’s Textbooks and
Personality Development: An Exploration in the Social Psychology of Education.” In Causes of
Behavior: Readings in Child Development and Education Psychology, edited by Judy F.
Rosenblith and Wesley Allinsmith . Rockleigh, New Jersey: Allyn.

39

Chimombo, Joseph, Mike Chibwanna, Chris Dzimadzi, Esme Kadzamira, Esther Kunkwenzu,
Demis Kunje and Dorothy Namphota. 2000. “Classroom, School and Home Factors that
Negatively Affect Girls’ Education in Malawi.” UNICEF, December.
CIES, Comparative and International Education Society. 2007. CIES 2007 51st Annual
Conference, “Engaging our Differences.” Conference held February 25-March 1, 2007.
Clark, Jeffrey Allard and Timothy Mahoney. 2004. “How Much of the Sky? Women in
American High School History Textbooks from the 1960s, 1980s and 1990s.” Social Education
68 (December):57-63
Clark, Roger, Ayton Kieran, Nicole Frechette and Pamela J. Keller. 2005. “Women of the
World, Re-write! Women in American World History High School Textbooks from the 1960s,
1980s and 1990s.” Social Education 69 (January-February):41-46.
Colclough, Christopher. 2007. “Global Gender Goals and the Construction of Equality:
Conceptual Dilemmas and Policy Practice.” Background paper for UNESCO 2008 Education for
All Report, draft.
Cortina, Regina and Nelly P. Stromquist, eds. 2000. Distant Alliances: Promoting Education for
Girls and Women in Latin America. New York and London: Routledge Falmer.
Crabb, Peter B. and Dawn Bielawski. 1994. “The Social Representation of Material Culture and
Gender in Children’s Books.” Sex Roles: A Journal of Research 30(1-2): 69-80.
Czaplinski, S.M. 1972. “Sexism in Award Winning Picture Books.” Pittsburgh, PA: Know.
Davis, Anita P. and Thomas R. McDaniel. 1999. “You’ve Come a Long Way, Baby—or Have
You? Research Evaluating Gender Portrayal in Recent Caldecott-winning Books.” The Reading
Teacher 52(5) (February):532-536.
Dollar, David and Roberta Gatti. 1999. “Gender Inequality, Income, and Growth: Are Good
Times Good Enough for Women?” World Bank Policy Research Report on Gender and
Development, Working Paper Series No. 1. Washington D.C.: The World Bank.
Drayton, Kathleen. 1997. “White Men’s Knowledge: Sex, Race and Class in Caribbean English
Language Textbooks.” In Gender: A Multidisciplinary Perspective, edited by E. A. Leo-Rhynie,
B. Bailey and C. Barrow. Kingston, Jamaica: Ian Randle Publishers.
Dwyer, Carol Anne. 2007. “Overview: Gender Equity from Early Childhood through
Postsecondary Education.” Pp. 559-601 in Handbook for Achieving Gender Equity Through
Education, ed. by Susan Klein et al. 2nd edition. Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Eduards, M. 1991. Rethinking Change: Current Feminist Research. Stockholm: HSFR.

40

Eilard, Angerd. 2004. “Gender and Ethnicity in a Reader in the Swedish Multiethnic
School.” Pedagogisk Forskning I Sverige 9(4):241-262. Stockholm.
Ellis, Elisabeth Gaynor and Anthony Esler. 1997. World History: Connections to Today. Upper
Saddle River, New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
Ellis, Jon. 2002. “Strengthening Subservience: Gender Bias in West Bengal School Textbooks.”
Manushi 128:23-24.
Gonzalez, Mirta. 1990. El sexismo en la educación: la discriminación cotidiana. Ciudad
Universitaria Rodrigo Facio: Editorial de la Universidad de Costa Rica.
Gordy, Laurie L., Jennifer Hogan, and Alice Pritchard. 2004. “Assessing ‘Herstory’ of WWII:
Content Analysis of High School History Textbooks.” Equity and Excellence in Education
37:80-91.
Grayson, Dolores A. 2007. “Overview: Administrative Strategies for Implementing Gender
Equity.” Pp. 59-62 in Handbook for Achieving Gender Equity Through Education, edited by
Susan S. Klein et al. 2nd edition. Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Gullock, K.A., J. C. Pearson, J. T. Child, & C. R. Schwab. 2005. “Diversity and Power in Public
Speaking Textbooks.” Communication Quarterly 53:247-258.
Guo, Lili and Zhenzhou Zhau. 2002. “Children, Gender, and Language Teaching Materials.”
Chinese Education and Society 35(5) (September-October):34-52.
Guo, Nan. 2003. “Analysis of the Image of Wu Zetian in Junior Middle School Teaching
Materials.” Chinese Education and Society 36(3):34-42.
Haavind, Hanne. “Love and Power in Marriage.” In Patriarchy in a Welfare State, edited by H.
Holter. Oslo: Universitetestforlaget.
Habrowski, Edward Paul. 1996. “Emerging Connections between Malawi’s Adult Literacy
Campaign and Primary Education.” Bloomington, IN: Dissertation, Indiana University.
Hahn, Carol L., Jane Bernard-Powers, Lisa Hunter, Susan Groves, Molly MacGregors
and Kathyn P. Scott. 1985. “Sex Equity in Social Studies.” Pp. 280-297 in Handbook for
Achieving Sex Equity Through Education, edited by Susan S. Klein. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins.
Hahn, Carol L., Jane Bernard-Powers, Margaret Crocco, and Christine Woyshner. 2007.
“Gender Equity and Social Studies.” Pp. 335-359 in Handbook for Achieving Gender Equity
Through Education, edited by Susan S. Klein et al. 2nd edition. Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Hamilton, Mykol C., David Anderson, Michelle Broaddus and Kate Young. 2006. “Gender
Stereotyping and Under-representation of Female Characters in 200 Popular Children’s Picture
Books: A Twenty-first Century Update.” Sex Roles: A Journal of Research 55(11-12):757-765.

41

Hanson, T. L. 1999. “Gender Sensitivity and Diversity Issues in Selected Basic Public Speaking
Texts.” Women and Language 22(2):13-19.
Hess, Peter. 1988. Population Growth and Socio-Economic Progress in Less Developed
Countries: Determinants of Fertility Transition. New York: Praeger.
Heyneman, Stephen P. 2006. “The Role of Textbooks in a Modern System of Education:
Towards High Quality Education for All.” Nashville, TN; Vanderbilt University.
Hicks, Frances Clay. 1974. “Continuing Task Force on Education for Women, Texas Feminist
Textbook Review.” Protest hearings on textbooks before Texas Education Agency. Austin, TX.
September 11, 1974.
________. 2007. Phone Interview, February 14, 2007.
Hirdman, Yvonne. 1992. “Kvinnorna I valfardsstaten. Sverige 1930-1990. Den vaxande
genuskonflikten.” Pp. 203-218 in Kvinno-Historia. Om kvinnors villkor fran antiken til vara
dagar. Forfattarna och Sveriges Utbildningsradio AB.
Holter, Harriet, ed. 1984. Patriarchy in a Welfare State. Oslo: Universitetsforlaget.
HREA. 2005. “Ministry of Education, Moroccan NGOs and HREA will Further Collaborate on
Promoting Gender Equality.” Human Rights Education Associates (December 9)
http://www.hrea.org/moroccan-textbooks-Dec-2005
Huang, He. 2002. “The Structuring of a Scientific Genderization: Analysis of the Hong Kong
Edition of Elementary School Teaching Materials.” Chinese Education and Society
35(5)(September-October):92-101.
Hyona, Jukka, Charles Destefano, Heli Hujanen, Johanna Lindeman, Elisa Poskiparta,
Adma D’Heurle, and Pekka Niemi. 1995. “Primers as Socializing Agents in American and
Finnish Schools.” Comparative Education Review 39(3):280-298.
Ibarra, Marta. 1997. Metodolgía para eliminar estereotipos sexuales en la educación y
comunicación social. Panama: UNICEF.
Introduction. 1974. “Introductory Remarks by Hattie Thurlow of Houston.” From Texas
Feminist Curriculum Review, September 11, 1974. Printed in Continuing Task Force on
Education for Women.
IPU (Inter-Parliamentary Union). 2007. http://www.ipu.org/wmn-e
Jackson, Sue. 2007. “She Might Not Have the Right Tools…and He Does: Children’s
Sensemaking of Gender, Work and Abilities in Early School Readers.” Gender and Education
19(1):61-77.

42

_________ and Susan Gee. 2005. “‘Look Janet’, ‘No You Look John’: Constructions of Gender
in Early School Reader Illustrations across 50 Years.” Gender and Education 17(2) (May):115128.
Jassey, Ikuko Anjo. 1998. “Gender in Elementary School Texts.” Japan Quarterly 45 (JanuaryMarch):87-93.
Kalia, Narendra Nath. 1979. The Lies We Tell Our Children: Sexism in Indian Education. New
Delhi: Vikas.
_________. 1986. From Sexism to Equality: A Handbook on How to Eliminate Sexist Bias from
Our Textbooks and Other Writings. New Delhi: New India Publications.
Kane, Eileen. 2004. Girls’ Education in Africa: What Do We Know about Strategies that Work?
Washington, D.C.: The World Bank, Africa Region.
King, R. and M. Morrissey. 1988. “Images in Print: Bias and Prejudice in Caribbean
Textbooks.” Institute of Social and Economic Research. Mona, Jamaica: University of the West
Indies.
Klasen, Stephan. 1999. “Does Gender Inequality Reduce Growth and Development? Evidence
from Cross-Country Regressions.” Policy Research Report on Gender and Development,
Working Paper No. 7. Washington D.C.: The World Bank.
Klein, Susan, ed. 1985. Handbook for Achieving Sex Equity Through Education. Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins Press.
Klein, Susan S. with Cheris Kramarae and Barbara Richardson. 2007. “Examining the
Achievement of Gender Equity in and through Education.” Pp. 1-13 in Handbook for Achieving
Gender Equity Through Education, edited by Susan S. Klein et al. 2nd edition. Mahwah, New
Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Lacampagne, Carole B., Patricia B. Campbell, Abbe H. Herzig, Suzanne Damarin, and
Christina M. Vogt. 2007. “Gender Equity in Mathematics.” Pp. 235-254 in Handbook for
Achieving Gender Equity Through Education, edited by Susan S. Klein, et al. 2nd edition.
Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Letticee, Marie A. 2000. “Sources of Bias in Textbooks for Children of Francophone
Guadeloupe.” Dissertation, University of Central Florida.
Lewis, Maureen and Marlaine Lockheed. 2007. Inexcusable Absence: Why 60 Million
Girls Still Aren’t In School and What to Do about It. Washington, D.C.: Center for Global
Development.
Li, Lai. 2003. “A Tentative Analysis of the Stereotyping of Gender Roles in IlliteracyElimination (IE) Teaching Materials.” Chinese Education and Society 36(3) (May-June):55-68.

43

Lin, Jing and Xin Chen. n.d. “Exploring Creative Ways to Enhance Girls’ Learning:
Learning from All-Girls Schools in China and around the World.” Working paper, draft. College
Park, MD: University of Maryland.
Liu, Yaqin. 2002. “Socialization of the Gender Role as Seen from Bao Bao’s Family
Classroom.” Chinese Education and Society 35(5)(September-October): 3-13.
Lloyd, Cynthia, ed. 2005. Growing Up Global: The Changing Transitions to Adulthood in
Developing Countries. Washington, D.C.: The National Academic Press.
_________, B. S. Mensch and W. H. Clark. 2000. “The Effects of Primary School Quality on
School Dropout Among Kenyan Girls and Boys.” Comparative Education Review 44(2):113147.
Lockheed, Marlaine. 2004. “The Purpose of Good Quality Education.” Background paper for
2005 Education for All Global Monitoring Report, The Quality Imperative. Paris: UNESCO.
Ma, Xin. 2007. “Gender Differences in Learning Outcomes.” University of
Kentucky. Background paper for 2008 Education for All Global Monitoring Report. Paris:
UNESCO.
Magendoza, Saloman. 1970. “Relación entre estereotipos de roles sexuales y libros de
enseñanza.” In Educación y realidad socioeconómica. Mexico, D.F.: Centro de Estudios
Educativos.
Mengyi, He. 2002. “How Much is Known about Gender Differences? Analysis Report on
Gender in Required Reading for Parents.” Chinese Education and Society 35(5) (SeptemberOctober):53- 62.
Miroiu, Mihaela. 2004. “All in One: Fairness, Neutrality and Conservatism—A Case Study of
Romania.” Prospects 34(1):85-100.
Montes de Oca, Marta and Ana Patricia Rosales. 1993. El sexismo y los cuentos infantiles de
autores y autoras costarricenses para niños y niñas de 3 a 6 años. San Pedro: Universidad de
Costa Rica, tesis de licenciatura.
Muhwezi, Doris Kakuru. 2003. “Gender Sensitive Educational Policy and Practice,
Uganda Case Study.” Prepared for the International Bureau of Education. Kampala, Uganda:
Makerere University.
Muñoz Cabrejo, Fanni. 2006. “De qué políticas educativas hablamos en el Peru? La
incorporación del género en la educación.” Pp. 63-113 in La construcción del género en las
políticas públicas: Perspectivas comparadas desde América Latina, edited by Nelly P.
Stromquist. Lima, Peru: IEP, Instituto de Estudios Peruanos.

44

Nash, Margaret A., Susan S. Klein, Barbara Bitters, William Howe, Sharon Hobbs, Linda
Shevitz, Linda Wharton with Eleanor Smeal. 2007. “The Role of Government in Advancing
Gender Equity in Education.” Pp. 63-101 in Handbook for Achieving Gender Equity Through
Education, edited by Susan S. Klein et al. 2nd edition. Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Nielsen, Harriet Bjerrum. 2004. “Noisy Girls – New Subjectivities and Old Gender Discourses.”
Young – Nordic Journal of Youth Research 12(1):9-30.
________ and Bronwyn Davies. 2007. “Discourse and the Construction of Gendered Identities
in Education.” Working Paper.
Ochoa, Jorge. 1983. La sociedad vista desde los textos escolares. Documento de Trabajo no. 4.
Santiago, Chile: CIDE.
O’Donnell, R. W. 1973. “Sex Bias in Primary Social Studies Textbooks.” Educational
Leadership 31:137-141.
O’Dowd, Mina. 2004. “Competence, Thy Name is Man: Encountering an Old Problem in New
Arenas and In New Guises.” Paper presented at the 21st Comparative Education Society in
Europe Conference. Copenhagen, June 27-July 1. First draft.
Oppenheimer, Valerie Kincade. 1973. “Demographic Influence on Female Employment and the
Status of Women.” American Journal of Sociology 78:946-961.
Ozdogogru, Asil Ali, Gizem Aksoy and Nurcin Erdogan. n.d. “Content Analysis for Gender
Bias in Turkish Elementary School Textbooks.” Albany, NY: SUNY Albany.
Paredes, Rosa, Rosa Caldea and Blanca de Sanchez. 1994. El sexismo en los textos escolares en
Centroamérica. Propuesta de una estrategia para su eliminación. Guatemala: Ediciones UNICEF.
Parsons, Linda T. 2004. “Ella Evolving: Cinderella Stories and the Construction of GenderAppropriate Behavior.” Children’s Literature in Education 35(2) (June):135-154.
Pinto, Regina Pahim. 1982. “A imagem da mulher atraves dos livros didáticos. Boletín
Bibliográfico de Biblioteca Mario de Andrade 43(3-4):126-131.
Pollard, Velma. 1989. “Images of Women in Some Modern Caribbean Texts.” Paper presented
at a Gender and Education Seminar. Faculty of Education and Women and Development Studies,
University of the West Indies, Mona, Jamaica.
Polnick, Barbara, Carol Dwyer, Carole Funk Haynie, Merle Froschl, Barbara Sprung, and
Doris Fromberg. 2007. “Gender Equity in Early Learning Environments.” Pp. 603-624 in
Handbook for Achieving Gender Equity Through Education, edited by Susan S. Klein et al. 2nd
edition. Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

45

Press Kit. 1974. “Protest Hearings on Textbooks before Texas Education Agency.” In
“Continuing Task Force on Education for Women,” from Frances Hicks’ Texas Feminist
Textbook Review. Austin, Texas, September 11, 1974.
Qu, Wen. 2003. “A Gender Analysis of the Vocational Roles in Adult Illiteracy Elimination (IE)
Teaching Materials.” Chinese Education and Society 36(3) (May-June): 80-93.
Quraishi, Uzma and Munnaza Ambreen. 2004. “Gender Stereotyping: An Analysis of Urdu
Textbooks.” Islamabad, Pakistan: Foundation University College of Liberal Arts & Sciences.
Also in Pakistan Journal of Education, 2004.
Ross, Heidi and Jinghuan Shi. 2003. “Entering the Gendered World of Teaching Materials, Part
II.” Chinese Education & Society 36(3) (May-June):3-9.
Sadker, Myra and David Sadker. 1980. “Sexism in Teacher Education Texts.” Harvard
Educational Review 50:36-46.
_________. 1994. Failing at Fairness: How America’s Schools Cheat Girls. New York:
Scribners.
Sadker, David. 1996. “Answering the Backlash, Where the Girls Are.” Education Week
(September 4) http://www.sadker.org/wherethegirlsare.htm
________. 1999. “Gender Equity: Still Knocking at the Classroom Door.” Educational
Leadership 56 (April).
________. 2000. “Answering the Backlash, Gender Games.” Washington Post (July 30).
http://www.sadker.org/gendergames.htm
________. n.d. “Seven Forms of Bias: Some Practical Ideas for Confronting Curricular Bias.”
http://www.american.edu/sadker/curricularbias.htm
_________, Karen Zittleman, Penelope Early, Theresa McCormick, Candace Strawn, JoAnne
Preston. 2007. “The Treatment of Gender Equity in Teacher Education.” Pp. 131-149 in
Handbook for Achieving Gender Equity Through Education, edited by Susan S. Klein et al. 2nd
edition. Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
________ and Karen Zittleman. 2007. “Gender Bias from Colonial America to Today’s
Classrooms.” Pp. 135-169 in Multicultural Education: Issues and Perspectives, edited by James
A. Banks and Cherry A. McGee Banks. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Saito, Katherine and Jean Weidemann. 1990. “Agricultural Extension for Women Farmers in
Africa.” Washington D.C.: The World Bank/Women in Development, Working Papers.

46

Sayin, Ayse, Feride Guven, Dr. Ipek Gurkaynak and Sati Atakul. 2003. “A Gender Review in
Education, Turkey 2003.” UNICEF.
Scardina, F. 1972. “Sexism in Textbooks in Pittsburgh Public Schools, Grades K-5.” Pittsburgh:
KNOW, Inc.
Schady, Norbert R. 2006. “Conditional Cash Transfer Programs: Reviewing the Evidence.”
Third International Conference on Conditional Cash Transfers. Istanbul, Turkey, World Bank,
June 26-30.
Shel, Tammy A. 2006. “Gender and Inequity in Education.” Literature Review, 1st draft.
Shi, Jinghuan and Heidi Ross. 2002. “Guest Editors’ Introduction.” Chinese Education and
Society 35(5)(September-October): 3-13.
Silva, Renán. 1979. “Imagen de la mujer en los textos escolares.” Revista Colombiana de
Educación 4(2d semester):9-52.
SIDA. 2007. “Progress in Educational Development: SIDA’s Contributions, 2006.”
Stockholm, Sweden: Swedish International Development Agency.
Song, Hui. (2003). “Who is a Good Student? An Exploration and Analysis of Stereotyped
Gender Impressions among Junior Middle School Teachers of Science Subjects.” Chinese
Education and Society 36(3):43-54.
Stromquist, Nelly P. 1989a. “Determinants of Educational Participation and Achievement of
Women in the Third World: A Review of the Evidence and a Theoretical Critique.” Review of
Educational Research 59(2):143-183.
________. 1989b. “Challenges to the Attainment of Women’s Literacy.” In Women and
Literacy: Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow. Report from a symposium sponsored by the Nordic
Association for the Study of Education in Developing Countries in Stockholm, June. Svenska
Unescoradets skriftserie Nr. 1/1992.
________. 1992a. Women and Education in Latin America: Knowledge, Power and Change.
Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner Publishers, Inc.
________. 1992b. “Micro- and Macro- Democracies: Toward a Theory of Convergence.” Paper
presented at the conference on “Education and Development Revisited,” organized by The
Institute of International Education, Stockholm University, December 17-18.
_______. 1997. Increasing Girls’ and Women’s Participation in Basic Education. Paris:
UNESCO, International Institute for Educational Planning.
________. 2006. La construcción del género en las políticas públicas: Perspectivas comparadas
desde América Latina. Lima, Peru: IEP, Instituto de Estudios Peruanos.

47

_______. 2007. “Gender Equity Education Globally.” Pp 33-43 in Handbook for Achieving
Gender Equity Through Education, edited by Susan Klein et al. 2nd edition. Mahwah, New
Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
________, Molly Lee and Birgit Brock-Utne. 1998. “The Explicit and the Hidden School
Curriculum.” Pp. 397-407 in Women in the Third World: An Encyclopedia of Contemporary
Issues, edited by Nelly Stromquist and Karen Monkman. New York: Garland Publishing, Inc.
Subrahmanian, Ramya. 2005. “Gender Equality in Education: Definitions and
Measurements.” International Journal of Educational Development 25:395-407.
Sweden. 2006. “Curriculum for the Compulsory School System, the Pre-school Class and the
Leisure-time Centre.” Stockholm: Skolverket.
Taylor, Anita, Alison Bailey, Pamela Cooper, Carol Dwyer, Cheris Kramarae, and
Barbara Lieb. 2007. “Gender Equity in Communication Skill.” Pp 281-303 in Handbook for
Achieving Gender Equity Through Education, edited by Susan Klein, et al. 2nd edition. Mahwah,
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Tembo, L. P. 1984. Men and Women in School Textbooks. Paris: UNESCO.
Tembon, Mercy. 2007. Personal Interview, Washington D.C., March 12, 2007.
Tetreault, Mary Kay Thompson. 1986. “Integrating Women’s History: The Case of United
States History High School Textbooks.” The History Teacher 19:211-261.
The National Literacy Trust. 2007. “Gender: Boys’ Reading Choices.” (March 15).
http://www.literacytrust.org.uk
Touorouzou, Some. 2006. “Gender Bias in Education in Burkina-Faso: Who Pays the
Piper? Who Calls the Tune? A Case for Homegrown Policies.” Journal of Contemporary Issues
in Education 1(1):3-19.
Trecker, Janice Law. 1971. “Women in U.S. History High School Textbooks.” Social Education
35:249-260.
U’Ren, Marjorie B. 1971. “The Image of Woman in Textbooks.” Pp 318-328 in Woman in
Sexist Society: Studies in Power and Powerlessness, edited by Vivian Gornick and Barbara K.
Moran. New York: Signet/New American Library.
UNESCO. 2002. Recomendaciones para un uso no sexista del lenguaje. Folleto. Paris:
UNESCO.
________. 2003. Education for All Global Monitoring Report. Gender and Education for All:
The Leap to Equality. Paris: UNESCO.

48

________. 2005. Education for All Global Monitoring Report. Education for All: Literacy for
Life. Paris: UNESCO.
________. 2006. Education for All Global Monitoring Report. Strong Foundations: Early
Childhood Care and Education. Paris: UNESCO.
_______. 2007. “Education and Empowerment of Girls and Women.” (August 8).
http://www.UNESCO.org
UNICEF/UNIFEM. 1990. Manual de recomendaciones para la eliminación de estereotipos
sexuales en los textos escolares y en los materiales educativos en general. Guatemala: UNICEF.
UNICEF. 2001. “2001 AZE: Reaching the Last Few: Girls’ Education in Azerbaijan.”
www.unicef.org/evaldatabase/index_14591.html.
_________. 2002. “Quality Education for All, From a Girl’s Point of View.” April. New York:
United Nations Children’s Fund.
_________. 2003a. “A Gender Review of Education, Turkey 2003.” New York: United Nations
Children’s Fund.
_________. 2003b. “Girls Education in Cape Verde.” October. New York: United Nations
Children’s Fund.
_________. 2003c. “Girls’ Education in Swaziland.” October. New York: United Nations
Children’s Fund.
_________. 2003d. “Girls’ Education in Togo.” October. New York: United Nations Children’s
Fund.
_________. 2003e. “Improving Girls’ Education through a Multi-Pronged Approach
in Eritrea.” Interview with Halima Mohammed Mahmud. April. New York: United Nations
Children’s Fund.
_________. 2004a. “Strategies for Girls’ Education.” May. New York: United Nations
Children’s Fund.
_________. 2004b. “A Solution to Almost Every Problem.” Annex A in The State of the
World’s Children 2004. New York: United Nations Children’s Fund.
_________. 2005. “Gender Achievements and Prospects in Education.” The Gap Report.
Part One. New York: United Nations Children’s Fund.
_________. 2006a. “The Double Dividend of Gender Equality.” Pp. 69-87 in The State of the
World’s Children 2007, Women and Children. New York: The United Nation’s Children’s Fund.

49

_________. 2006b. “Women and Children: The Double Dividend of Gender Equality.” The State
of the World’s Children 2007, Latin America and Caribbean Edition. Panama City, Panama:
United Nations Children’s Fund.
UNICEF Economic and Social Council Report. 2004. “Summary of Midterm Reviews and
Major Evaluations of Country Programs, Middle East and North Africa Region.” September.
Vianna, Claudia and Sandra Unbehaum. 2006. “La inclusión de la perspectiva de género en las
políticas públicas de la educación en Brasil.” Pp. 115-165 in La construcción del género en las
políticas públicas:_Perspectivas comparadas desde América Latina, edited by Nelly P.
Stromquist. Lima, Peru: IEP, Instituto de Estudios Peruanos
Wainerman, Catalina, and Rebecca Barck. 1984. La división sexual del trabajo en los libros de
lectura de la escuela primaria argentina: Un caso de inmutabilidad secular. Buenos Aires: Centro
de Estudios de Población.
Wang, Su. 2003. “A Gender Analysis of Women’s Illiteracy Elimination and Post-Illiteracy
Elimination (IE) Teaching Materials.” Chinese Education and Society 36(3)(May-June):69-79.
Wang, Yi. 2003. “From Dutiful Wife and Good Mother to Professional Woman? An Analysis of
Changes in the Image and Role of Females in Junior Elementary School Language Teaching
Materials form the End of the Qing Dynasty to the 1940s.” Chinese Education and Society
36(3)(May-June):10-18.
Weitzman, L. J., D. Eifler, E. Hokada and C. Ross. 1972. “Sex-role Socialization in Picture
Books for Preschool Children.” American Journal of Sociology 77:1125-1150.
Wellros, Seija. 1995. “Sagor eller sanningar.” Pa latt svenska – Invandrartidningen 14/95 (cited
in Marie Carlson 2007).
Wikander, Ulla. 1992. “Kvinnor, krig och industriell rationalisering.” Pp. 188-202 in KvinnoHistoria. Forfattarna och Utbildningsradio AB (cited in Mina O’Dowd 2004).
Wils, Annababette, Bidemi Carrol, and Karima Barrow. 2005. “Educating the World’s Children:
Patterns of Growth and Inequality.” Washington D.C.: Education Policy and Data Center.
Whiteley, Peter. 1996. “The Gender Fairness of Integrated Science Textbooks used in Jamaican
High Schools.” Journal of Science Education.
World Bank. 2004. “Engendering Change in the Classroom.” (November 11).
http://web.worldbank.org
Yi, Jin. 2002. “A Discussion on the Form of Elementary School Social Teaching Materials from
the Angle of Gender Analysis.” Chinese Education and Society 35(5) (September-October):6376.

50

Youth and the MDGs. 2005. “Youth and the Millennium Development Goals:
Challenges and Opportunities for Implementation.” Final Report of the Ad Hoc Working Group
for Youth and the MDGs, April.
Zhang, Lili. 2003. “A Study of Junior Middle School Language Teaching Gender Issues.”
Chinese Education and Society 36(3) (May-June):19-26.
Zhang, Yong. 2002. “Analysis of the Social Gender Culture in Children’s Games.” Chinese
Education and Society 35(5)(September-October):77-91.
Zhao, Ping. 2003. “Mother and I, An Analysis of the Gender Roles of Two Generations of
Females in Junior Middle School English-Language Teaching Materials.” Chinese Education
and Society 36(3)(May-June):27-33.
Zittleman, Karen R. 2007. “Teachers, Students and Title IX: A Promise for Fairness.” Pp. 73107 in Gender in the Classroom: Foundations, Skills, Methods and Strategies across the
Curriculum, edited by David Sadker and Ellen Silber. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
_________ and David Sadker. 2002. “Gender Bias in Teacher Education Texts: New (and Old)
Lessons.” Journal of Teacher Education 53(2):168-181.
________. 2002-2003. “Teacher Education Textbooks: The Unfinished Gender Revolution.”
Educational Leadership. (December-January).

51

APPENDIX A – From the Work of Myra and David Sadker on Curricular Bias
FROM: http://www.american.edu/sadker/curricularbias.htm

Seven Forms of Bias: Some Practical Ideas for Confronting Curricular Bias
Back in the 1970s and the 1980s, publishers and professional associations issued
guidelines for non-racist and non-sexist books. As a result, texts of the last
twenty years are much improved. Unfortunately, they are far from bias-free. The
following seven forms of bias can be found not only in K-12 textbooks, but also
in college texts, in the media - in fact, they are all around us. Feel free to
explore these definitions with your students, as well as try the strategies
suggested.
Seven Forms of Bias in Instructional Materials
lnvisibility: What You Don't See Makes a Lasting lmpression.
The most fundamental and oldest form of bias in instructional materials is the
complete or relative exclusion of a group. Textbooks published prior to the
1960s largely omitted African Americans, Latinos, and Asian Americans from both
the narrative and illustrations. Many of today's textbooks are improved, but far
from perfect. Women, those with disabilities, gays and homosexuals continue to
be missing from many of today's texts.
Stereotyping: Shortcuts to Bigotry.
Perhaps 'the most familiar form of bias is the stereotype, which assigns a rigid
set of characteristics to all members of a group, at the cost of individual
attributes and differences. While stereotypes can be positive, they are more
often negative. Some typical stereotypes include:
Men portrayed as assertive and successful in their jobs, but rarely discussed
as husbands or fathers.
Women as caregivers
Jews as rich
Imbalance and Selectivity: A Tale Half Told.
Curriculum may perpetuate bias by presenting only one interpretation of an
issue, situation, or group of people. Such accounts simplify and distort complex
issues by omitting different perspectives.
A text reports that women were "given" the vote, but does not discuss the
work, sacrifices, and even physical abuse suffered by the leaders of the
suffrage movement that "won" the vote.
Literature is drawn primarily from western, male authors.
Math and science courses typically reference European discoveries and
formulas.

52

Unreality: Rose Colored Glasses,
Many researchers have noted the tendency of instructional materials to gloss
over unpleasant facts and events in our history. By ignoring prejudice, racism,
discrimination, exploitation, oppression, sexism, and inter-group conflict, we
deny students the information they need to-recognize, understand, and perhaps
some day conquer societal problems. Examples include:
Because of affirmative action programs, people of color and women now enjoy
economic and political equality with (or superiority over) white males.
The notion that technology will resolve persistent social problems.
Fragmentation and lsolation: The Parts Are Less than the Whole.
Did you ever notice a "special" chapter or insert appearing in a text? For
example, a chapter on "Bootleggers, Suffragettes, and Other Diversions" or a box
describing "Ten Black Achievers in Science." Frag.men5.aiion emerges when a group
. is physically or visually isolated in the text. Often, racial and ett-lnic group
members are depicted as interacting only with persons like themselves, isolated
from other cultural communities. While this form of bias may be less damaging
than omission or stereotypes, fragmentation and isolation present non-dominant
groups as peripheral members of society.
Linguistic Bias: Words Count.
Language can be a powerful conveyor of bias, in both blatant and s~lbtlefo rms.
Linguistic bias can impact race/ethnicity, gender, accents, age, (dis)ability
and sexual orientation.
Native Americans described as "roaming," "wandering," or "roving" across the
land. Such language implicitly justifies the seizure of Native lands by "more
goal-directed" white Americans who "traveled" or "settled" their way westward.
Such words as forefathers, mankind, and businessman serve to deny the
contributions (even the existence) of females.
The bias against non-English speakers.
Cosmetic Bias: "Shiny" covers.
The relatively new cosmetic bias suggests that a text is bias free, but beyond
the attractive covers, photos, or posters, bias persists. This "illusion of
equity" is really a marketing strategy to give a favorable impression to
potential purchasers who only flip the pages of books.
A science textbook that features a glossy pullout of female scientists but
includes precious little narrative of the scientific contributions of women.
A music book with an eye-catching, multiethnic cover that projects a world of
diverse songs and symphonies belies the tradi,l:ional white male composers
lurking behind the cover.
lnvestigative Strategies for Bias Detectives
Here are several strategies for teaching these concepts in K-I 2 and teacher
education classrooms. Ask students to review school textbooks and identify each

53

of these seven forms. Then ask them to suggest ways to remove the bias and
create more equitable textbooks.
Extend this activity by asking students to identify these forms of bias in
college level texts (academic areas as well as teacher education), or in
magazines and television programming.
While curriculum bias clearly impacts females and students of color, males can
also be victims as well. Using the 7 forms of bias as a framework, find
examples that negatively impacts males, and suggest ways to overcome the bias.
Ask students to identify how these seven forms emerge in interpersonal
interactions. For example, teachers stereotype when males are asked to help
with physical classroom tasks, or fragment by studying African Americans only
during “Black History Month”).

54

