Mengel, Friederike; Sauermann, Jan; Zölitz, Ulf

Working Paper

Gender Bias in Teaching Evaluations

IZA Discussion Papers, No. 11000
Provided in Cooperation with:
IZA – Institute of Labor Economics

Suggested Citation: Mengel, Friederike; Sauermann, Jan; Zölitz, Ulf (2017) : Gender Bias in
Teaching Evaluations, IZA Discussion Papers, No. 11000, Institute of Labor Economics (IZA),
Bonn

This Version is available at:
http://hdl.handle.net/10419/170984
Standard-Nutzungsbedingungen:

Terms of use:

Die Dokumente auf EconStor dürfen zu eigenen wissenschaftlichen
Zwecken und zum Privatgebrauch gespeichert und kopiert werden.

Documents in EconStor may be saved and copied for your
personal and scholarly purposes.

Sie dürfen die Dokumente nicht für öffentliche oder kommerzielle
Zwecke vervielfältigen, öffentlich ausstellen, öffentlich zugänglich
machen, vertreiben oder anderweitig nutzen.

You are not to copy documents for public or commercial
purposes, to exhibit the documents publicly, to make them
publicly available on the internet, or to distribute or otherwise
use the documents in public.

Sofern die Verfasser die Dokumente unter Open-Content-Lizenzen
(insbesondere CC-Lizenzen) zur Verfügung gestellt haben sollten,
gelten abweichend von diesen Nutzungsbedingungen die in der dort
genannten Lizenz gewährten Nutzungsrechte.

If the documents have been made available under an Open
Content Licence (especially Creative Commons Licences), you
may exercise further usage rights as specified in the indicated
licence.

DISCUSSION PAPER SERIES

IZA DP No. 11000

Gender Bias in Teaching Evaluations

Friederike Mengel
Jan Sauermann
Ulf Zölitz

SEPTEMBER 2017

DISCUSSION PAPER SERIES

IZA DP No. 11000

Gender Bias in Teaching Evaluations

Friederike Mengel

University of Essex and Lund University

Jan Sauermann

SOFI, Stockholm University, CCP, IZA and ROA

Ulf Zölitz

briq and IZA

SEPTEMBER 2017

Any opinions expressed in this paper are those of the author(s) and not those of IZA. Research published in this series may
include views on policy, but IZA takes no institutional policy positions. The IZA research network is committed to the IZA
Guiding Principles of Research Integrity.
The IZA Institute of Labor Economics is an independent economic research institute that conducts research in labor economics
and offers evidence-based policy advice on labor market issues. Supported by the Deutsche Post Foundation, IZA runs the
world’s largest network of economists, whose research aims to provide answers to the global labor market challenges of our
time. Our key objective is to build bridges between academic research, policymakers and society.
IZA Discussion Papers often represent preliminary work and are circulated to encourage discussion. Citation of such a paper
should account for its provisional character. A revised version may be available directly from the author.

IZA – Institute of Labor Economics
Schaumburg-Lippe-Straße 5–9
53113 Bonn, Germany

Phone: +49-228-3894-0
Email: publications@iza.org

www.iza.org

IZA DP No. 11000

SEPTEMBER 2017

ABSTRACT
Gender Bias in Teaching Evaluations*
This paper provides new evidence on gender bias in teaching evaluations. We exploit a
quasi-experimental dataset of 19,952 student evaluations of university faculty in a context
where students are randomly allocated to female or male instructors. Despite the fact that
neither students’ grades nor self-study hours are affected by the instructor’s gender, we find
that women receive systematically lower teaching evaluations than their male colleagues.
This bias is driven by male students’ evaluations, is larger for mathematical courses and
particularly pronounced for junior women. The gender bias in teaching evaluations we
document may have direct as well as indirect effects on the career progression of women
by affecting junior women’s confidence and through the reallocation of instructor resources
away from research and towards teaching.
JEL Classification:

J16, J71, I23, J45

Keywords:

gender bias, teaching evaluations, female faculty

Corresponding author:
Ulf Zölitz
Behavior and Inequality Research Institute (briq)
Schaumburg-Lippe-Str. 5-9
53113 Bonn
Germany
E-mail: ulf.zoelitz@briq-institute.org

* We thank Elena Cettolin, Kathie Coffman, Patricio Dalton, Luise Görges, Nabanita Datta Gupta, Charles Nouissar,
Björn Öckert, Anna Piil Damm, Robert Dur, Louis Raes, Daniele Paserman, three anonymous reviewers and seminar
participants in Stockholm, Tilburg, Nuremberg, Uppsala, Aarhus, the BGSE Summer Forum in Barcelona, the EALE/
SOLE conference in Montreal, the AEA meetings in San Francisco and the IZA reading group in Bonn for helpful
comments. We thank Sophia Wagner for providing excellent research assistance. Friederike Mengel thanks the Dutch
Science Foundation (NWO Veni grant 016.125.040) for financial support. Jan Sauermann thanks the Jan Wallanders
och Tom Hedelius Stiftelse for financial support (Grant number I2011-0345:1). The Online Appendix can be found on
the authors’ websites.

1

Introduction

Why are there so few female professors? Despite the fact that the fraction
of women enrolling in graduate programs has steadily increased over the last
decades, the proportion of women who continue their careers in academia
remains low. Potential explanations for the controversially debated question
of why some fields in academia are so male dominated include differences in
preferences (e.g., competitiveness), differences in child rearing responsibilities,
and gender discrimination.1
One frequently used assessment criterion for faculty performance in academia are student evaluations. In the competitive world of academia, these
teaching evaluations are often part of hiring, tenure and promotion decisions
and, thus, have a strong impact on career progression. Feedback from teaching
evaluations could also affect the confidence and beliefs of young academics and
may lead to a reallocation of scarce resources from research to teaching. This
reallocation of resources may in turn lead to lower (quality) research outputs.2
In this paper we investigate whether there is a gender bias in university
teaching evaluations. Gender bias exists if women and men receive different
evaluations which cannot be explained by objective differences in teaching
1
The “leaking pipeline” in Economics is summarized by McElroy (2016), who reports
that in 2015 35% of new PhDs were female, 28% of assistant professors, 24% of tenured
associate professors and 12% of full professors. Similar results can be found in Kahn (1993),
Broder (1993), McDowell et al. (1999), European Commission (2009), or National Science
Foundation (2009). Possible explanations for these gender differences in labor market outcomes are discussed by Heilman and Chen (2005), Croson and Gneezy (2009), Lalanne and
Seabright (2011), Hederos Eriksson and Sandberg (2012), Hernández-Arenaz and Iriberri
(2016) or Leibbrandt and List (2015), among others.
2

Indeed, there is evidence that female university faculty allocate more time to teaching
compared to men (Link et al. 2008). Such reallocations of resources away from research can
be detrimental for women with both research and teaching contracts. For instructors with
teaching-only contracts the direct effects on promotion and tenure are likely to be even more
substantial.

1

quality. We exploit a quasi-experimental dataset of 19,952 evaluations of instructors at Maastricht University in the Netherlands. To identify causal effects, we exploit the institutional feature that within each course students are
randomly assigned to either female or male section instructors.3 In addition to
students’ subjective evaluations of their instructors’ performance, our dataset
also contains students’ course grades, which are mostly based on centralized
exams and are usually not graded by the section instructors whose evaluation
we are analyzing. This provides us with an objective measure of the instructors’ performance. Furthermore, we observe a measure of effort, namely the
self-reported number of hours students spent studying for the course, which
allows us to test if students adjust their effort in response to female instructors.
Our results show that female faculty receive systematically lower teaching
evaluations than their male colleagues despite the fact that neither students’
current or future grades nor their study hours are affected by the gender of
the instructor. The lower teaching evaluations of female faculty stem mostly
from male students, who evaluate their female instructors 21% of a standard
deviation worse than their male instructors. While female students were found
to rate female instructors about 8% of a standard deviation lower than male
instructors.
When testing whether results differ by seniority, we find the effects to be
driven by junior instructors, particularly PhD students, who receive 28% of
a standard deviation lower teaching evaluations than their male colleagues.
Interestingly, we do not observe this gender bias for more senior female instructors like lecturers or professors. We do find, however, that the gender
3

Throughout this paper, we use the term instructor to describe all types of teachers
(students, PhD students, post-docs, assistant, associate and full professors) who are teaching
groups of students (sections) as part of a larger course.

2

bias is substantially larger for courses with math-related content. Within
each of these subgroups, we confirm that the bias cannot be explained by
objective differences in grades or student effort. Furthermore, we find that
the gender bias is independent of whether the majority of instructors within
a course is female or male. Importantly, this suggests that the bias works
against female instructors in general and not only against minority faculty in
gender-incongruent areas, e.g., teaching in more math intensive courses.
The gender bias against women is not only present in evaluation questions relating to the individual instructor, but also when students are asked
to evaluate learning materials, such as text books, research articles and the
online learning platform. Strikingly, despite the fact that learning materials
are identical for all students within a course and are independent of the gender of the section instructor, male students evaluate these worse when their
instructor is female. One possible mechanism to explain this spillover effect
is that students anchor their response to material-related questions based on
their previous responses to instructor-related questions.
Since student evaluations are frequently used as a measure of teaching
quality in hiring, promotion and tenure decisions, our findings have worrying
implications for the progression of junior women in academic careers. The
sizeable and systematic bias against female instructors that we document in
this article is likely to affect women in their career progression in a number of
ways. First, when being evaluated on the job market or for tenure, women will
appear systematically worse at teaching compared to men. Second, negative
feedback in the form of evaluations is likely to induce a reallocation of resources
away from research towards teaching-related activities, which could possibly
affect the publication record of women. Third, the gender gap in teaching
evaluations may affect women’s self-confidence and beliefs about their teaching
3

abilities, which may be a factor in explaining why women are more likely than
men to drop out of academia after graduate school.
In the existing literature, a number of related studies investigate gender
bias in teaching evaluations. MacNell et al. (2015) conduct an experiment
within an online course where they manipulate the information students receive
about the gender of their instructor. The authors find that students evaluate
the male identity significantly better than the female identity, regardless of the
instructor’s actual gender. One advantage of the study by MacNell et al. (2015)
is that teaching quality and style can literally be held constant by deceiving
students about the instructor’s true gender identity by limiting contact to
online interaction only. In comparison to MacNell et al. (2015), our study
uses data from a more traditional classroom setting and has larger sample size
(n=19,952), with theirs having a sample size of only 43 students assigned to 4
different instructor identities.
In a similar context to ours, Boring (2017) also finds that male university
students evaluate female instructors worse and provides evidence for genderstereotypical evaluation patterns. While male instructors are rewarded for
non-time-consuming dimensions of the course, such as leadership skills, female
instructors are rewarded for more time-consuming skills, such as the preparation of classes.4 In contrast to the study by Boring (2017), where students are
able to choose sections with the knowledge of the genders of their instructors,
4

Additional suggestive evidence for gender-stereotypical evaluation patterns comes from
an analysis of reviews on RateMyProfessor.com, where male professors are more likely described as smart, intelligent or genius, and female professors are more likely described as
bossy, insecure or annoying (New York Times online; http://nyti.ms/1EN9iFA). Wu (2017)
studies gender stereotyping in the language used to describe women and men in anonymous online conversations related to the economics profession. Wu (2017) finds that women
are less likely to be described with academic or professional terms and more likely to be
described with terms referring to physical attributes or personal characteristics.

4

we study evaluations in a setting where students are randomly assigned to
sections, which helps alleviate concerns regarding student selection.

5

Fur-

thermore, going beyond Boring (2017), our study provides additional evidence
on whether longer-term learning outcomes such as subsequent grades, first
year GPAs and final GPAs are affected by instructor gender.
By documenting gender bias in teaching evaluations, this paper also contributes to the ongoing and more general discussion on the validity of teaching
evaluations (Stark and Freishtat 2014). While, for example, Hoffman and Oreopoulos (2009) concludes that subjective teacher evaluations are suitable measures to gauge an instructor’s influence on student dropout rates and course
choice, Carrell and West (2010), by contrast, finds that teaching evaluations
are negatively related to the instructor’s influence on the future performance
of students in advanced classes.
There is also a large literature in education research and educational psychology on the gender bias in teaching evaluations.6 Many studies in this
strand of the literature face endogeneity problems and issues related to data
limitation. For example, instructor assignment is typically not exogenous,
while the timing of surveys and exams gives rise to reverse causality problems.
In several of these studies, it is not possible to compare individual level evaluations by student gender. Thus, Centra and Gaubatz (2000) conclude that
findings in this literature are mixed.
5

Compared to the body of existing literature, the study by Boring (2017) has a relatively
clean identification. Incentives for students to select courses based on instructor gender are
reduced as students have to choose blocks consisting of three sections and are not able to
change sections once teaching has started.
6

See Anderson et al. (2005), Basow and Silberg (1987), Bennett (1982), Elmore and
LaPointe (1974), Harris (1975), Kaschak (1978), Marsh (1984) or Potvin et al. (2009),
among others.

5

A number of related studies analyze gender biases in academic hiring decisions, the peer review process or academic promotions. Blank (1991) and
Abrevaya and Hamermesh (2012) study gender bias in the journal refereeing process and do not find that referees’ recommendations are affected by
the author’s gender. In contrast to this, Broder (1993), Wennerås and Wold
(1997) and Van der Lee and Ellemers (2015) find that proposals submitted to
national science foundations by female researchers are rated worse compared
to men’s proposals.7 Two shortcomings in this strand of the literature are
that the above-cited studies are not able to provide evidence on the potential
underlying objective performance differences between women and men, and,
in most cases, evaluators are typically not randomly assigned. A few studies
have exploited random variation in the composition of hiring and promotion
committees to test whether decisions are affected by the share of women in
the committee, finding mixed results. While Bagues et al. (2017) find that
the gender composition of committees does not affect hiring decisions, Bagues
and Esteve-Volart (2010) present evidence that candidates become less likely
to be hired if the committee contains a higher share of evaluators with the
same gender as the candidate. De Paola and Scoppa (2015) find that female
candidates are less likely to be promoted when a committee is composed exclusively of males and that the gender promotion gap disappears with mixed-sex
committees.
Finally, our study also relates to a large literature on in-group biases
that documents favoritism towards individuals of the same “type” (Tajfel and
Turner 1986, Price and Wolfers 2010, Shayo and Zussman 2011). Shayo and
Zussman (2011), for example, find that in Israeli small claims courts Jewish
7

Along these lines, Krawczyk and Smyk (2016) conduct a lab experiment and provide
evidence that both women and men evaluate papers by women worse.

6

judges accept more claims by Jewish plaintiffs compared to Arab judges, while
Arab judges accept more claims by Arab plaintiffs compared to Jewish judges.
Price and Wolfers (2010) analyze data from NBA basketball games and find
that more personal fouls are awarded against players when they are officiated
by an opposite-race officiating crew than when they are officiated by an ownrace refereeing crew. In both these settings, agents favor their group relative
to another group. In our setting, by contrast, we identify an absolute bias
against women, though it is stronger among the out-group compared to the
in-group.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we provide information on
the institutional background and data. In Section 3 we develop a conceptual
framework and derive testable hypotheses. In Section 4 we discuss our estimation strategy and main results. Section 5 provides additional evidence on the
underlying mechanisms which could explain our results. Section 6 concludes
the article.

2

Background and data

2.1

Institutional environment

We use data collected at the School of Business and Economics (SBE) of
Maastricht University in the Netherlands, which contain rich information on
student performance and outcomes of instructor evaluations.
The data and institutional setting that we study in this article is close to an
ideal setup to investigate gender bias in teaching evaluations. First, as a key
institutional feature, students are randomly assigned to section instructors
within courses, which helps us to overcome selection problems that exist in
7

many other environments. Second, the data we use contain both a detailed
set of students’ subjective course evaluation items and their course grades,
which allows us to link arguably more objective performance indicators to
subjective evaluation outcomes at the individual level. Furthermore, the data
also contain information on self-reported study hours, providing us with a
measure of the effort students put into the course.
The data we use spans the academic years 2009/2010 to 2012/2013, including all bachelor and master programs.8 The academic year is divided into
four seven-week-long teaching periods, in each of which students usually take
up to two courses at the same time.9 Most courses consist of a weekly lecture
which is attended by all students and is typically taught by senior instructors.
In addition, students are required to participate in sections which typically
meet twice per week for two hours each. For these sections, all students taking
a course are randomly split into groups of at most 15 students. Instructors
in these sections can be either professors (full, associate or assistant), postdocs, PhD students, lecturers, or graduate student teaching assistants.10 Our
analysis focuses on the teaching evaluations of these section instructors.
8

See Feld and Zölitz (2017) as well as Zölitz and Feld (2017) for a similar and more
detailed description of the data and the institutional background. The data used in this
study was gathered with the consent of the SBE, the Scheduling Department (information
on instructors and student assignment) and the Examinations Office (information on student
course evaluations, grades and student background, such as gender, age and nationality).
There was no ethical review board for Social Sciences at Maastricht at the time Feld and
Zölitz (2017) gathered these data. Subsequently, ethical approval for the analysis of data
has been obtained from the University of Essex FEC.
9
In addition to the four terms, there are two two-weeks periods each academic year known
as “Skills Periods.” We exclude courses in these periods from our analysis because these
are often not graded or evaluated and usually include multiple staff members which cannot
always be identified.
10

Lecturers are teachers on temporary teaching-only contracts and can either have a PhD
or not. When referring to professors, we include research and teaching staff at any level
(assistant, associate, full) with and without tenure as well as post-docs.

8

Throughout this article, we refer to each course-year-term combination as a
separate course. In total, our sample comprises 735 different instructors, 9,010
students, 809 courses, and 6,206 sections.11 Column (1) of Table 1 shows that
35% of the instructors and 38% of the students in our sample are female.
Because of its proximity to Germany, 51% of the students are German, and
only 30% are Dutch. Students are, on average, 21 years old. Most students are
enrolled in Business (54%), followed by 28% of students in Economics. A total
of 25% of the students are enrolled in master programs. Of all student-course
registrations, 7% of students do not complete the course.
Table 2 provides additional cross-tabulations of instructor type by course
themes. While 38% of all instructors in Business courses are female, 32% of
instructors are female in Economics. For courses that neither fall into the
Business or Economics field, 32% of instructors are female. The lower half
of Table 2 reports the mean and standard deviation of various evaluation
domains by course type. While there is considerable variation within the five
evaluation domains, there seem to be no systematic differences across Business,
Economics and other types of courses.

2.2

Relevance of teaching evaluations at the institution

The two key criteria for tenure decisions at Maastricht University are research
output and teaching evaluations. The minimum requirements for both criteria
11

From the total sample of students registered in courses during our sample period, we
exclude exchange students from other universities as well as part-time (masters) students.
We also exclude 6,724 observations where we do not have information on student or instructor gender. Furthermore, we exclude 3% of the estimation sample where sections exceeded
15 students as these are most likely irregular courses. There are also a few exceptions to
this general procedure where, e.g., the course coordinators experimented with the section
composition. Since these data may potentially be biased, we remove all exceptions from the
random assignment procedure from the estimation sample.

9

vary across departments, with more research oriented departments typically
placing greater weight on research performance and more teaching oriented
departments greater weight on teaching performance. The outcome of teaching evaluations is also a part of the yearly evaluation talk between employees,
supervisors and the human resources representative. The Department for Applied Economics, for example, has imposed a threshold for average scores on
teaching evaluations that needs to be met to receive tenure as an assistant
professor or for promotion to associate professor.
If evaluations of instructors are significantly lower than evaluations for the
same course in previous years, the central Program Committee writes letters
to instructors explaining that their teaching quality is below expectations and
that they will be moved to teaching different courses if evaluations do not
improve in the following years. The Program Committee also decides whether
to inform the respective department head about weak evaluations of department members. Low-performing instructors can be assigned to teach different
courses, and those with very good teaching evaluations can receive teaching
awards and extra monetary payments based on their evaluation scores.
In addition, teaching records of graduate students containing the results
of teaching evaluations are frequently taken to the job market and may thus
affect hiring decisions in the earliest stages of their careers. At SBE teaching
evaluations are also relevant for tenure and promotion decisions as well as
salary negotiations.

2.3

Assignment of instructors and students to sections

The Scheduling Department at SBE assigns teaching sections to time slots,
and instructors and students to sections. Before each period, students register
10

online for courses. After the registration deadline, the Scheduling Department
gets a list of registered students. First, instructors are assigned to time slots
and rooms.12 Second, the students are randomly allocated to the available sections. In the first year for which we have data available (2009/10), the section
assignment for all courses was done with the software “Syllabus Plus Enterprise Timetable” using the allocation option “allocate randomly.”13 Since the
academic year 2010/11, the random assignment of bachelor students is additionally stratified by nationality using the software SPASSAT. Some bachelor
courses are also stratified by exchange student status.
After the assignment of students to sections, the software highlights scheduling conflicts. Scheduling conflicts arise for about 5 percent of the initial assignments. In the case of scheduling conflicts, the scheduler manually moves
students between different sections until all scheduling conflicts are resolved.14
The next step in the scheduling procedure is that the section and instructor
assignment is published. After this, the Scheduling Department receives information on late registering students and allocates them to the empty spots.
Although only 2.6% in our data register late, the scheduling department leaves
about ten percent of the slots empty to be filled with late registrants. This
12
About ten percent of instructors indicate time slots when they are not available for
teaching. This happens before they are scheduled and requires the signature from the
department chair. Since students are randomly allocated to the available sections, this
procedure does not affect the identification of the parameters of interest in this paper.
13

See Figure A1 in the Online Appendix for a screenshot of the software.

14
There are four reasons for scheduling conflicts: (1) the student takes another regular
course at the same time. (2) The student takes a language course at the same time. (3) The
student is also a teaching assistant and needs to teach at the same time. (4) The student
indicated non-availability for evening education. By default all students are recorded as
available for evening sessions. Students can opt out of this by indicating this in an online
form. Evening sessions are scheduled from 6 p.m. to 8 p.m., and about three percent of all
sessions in our sample are scheduled for this time slot. The schedulers interviewed indicated
that they follow no particular criteria when reallocating students.

11

procedure balances the amount of late registration students over the sections.
Switching sections is only allowed for medical reasons or when the students
are listed as top athletes and need to attend practice for their sport, which
only occurs for around 20 to 25 students in each term.
Throughout the scheduling process, neither students nor schedulers, and
not even course coordinators, can influence the assignment of instructors or the
gender composition of sections. The gender composition of a section and the
gender of the assigned instructor are random and exogenous to the outcomes
we investigate as long as we include course fixed effects. The inclusion of course
fixed-effects is necessary since this is the level at which the randomization takes
place. Course fixed-effects also pick up all other systematic differences across
courses and account for student selection into courses. We also include parallel
course fixed-effects, which are defined as fixed effects for the other courses
students take in the same term, to account for all deviations from the random
assignment arising from scheduling conflicts. Table 3 provides evidence on
the randomness of this assignment by showing the results of a regression of
instructor gender on student gender and other student characteristics. The
results show that, except for students’ age, instructor gender is not correlated
with student characteristics, either individually (Columns (1) to (9)), or jointly
(Columns (10) and (11)).15 These results confirm that there is no sorting of
students to instructors.
15

The estimated age coefficient implies that students who get assigned to a female instructor are on average .67 days (15.7 hours) younger. We consider the size of this effect
economically insignificant. All our main point estimates of interest are virtually identical
when adding student age or any other student characteristics as an additional control to our
regressions.

12

2.4

Data on teaching evaluations

In the last teaching week before the final exams, students receive an email
with a link to the online teaching evaluation, followed by a reminder a few
days later. To avoid that students evaluate a course after they learned about
the exam content or their exam grade, participation in the evaluation survey is
only possible before the exam takes place. Likewise, faculty members receive
no information about their evaluation before they have submitted the final
course grades to the examination office. This “double blind” procedure is implemented to prevent either of the two parties retaliating by providing negative
feedback with lower grades or through teaching evaluations. For our identification strategy, it is important to keep in mind that students obtain their grade
after they evaluated the instructor (cf. Figure 1). Individual student evaluations are anonymous, and instructors only receive information aggregated at
the section level.
Table 4 lists the 16 statements which are part of the evaluation survey. We
group these items into instructor-related statements (five items), group-related
statements (two items), course material-related statements (five items), and
course-related statements (four items). Only the first, instructor-related statements, contain items that are directly attributable to the instructor. Course
materials are centrally provided by the course coordinator and are identical
for all section instructors. Because of fairness considerations, section instructors are requested to only use the teaching materials provided by the course
coordinator. All evaluation questions except study hours are answered on a
five point Likert scale. To simplify the analysis, we first standardize each item,
and then calculate the average for each group.

13

Out of the full sample of all student-course registrations, 36% participate
in the instructor evaluation.16 This creates the potential for sample selection
bias. Column (2) of Table 1 shows the descriptive statistics for the estimation
sample (N = 19, 952). It shows, e.g., that female students are more likely to
participate in teaching evaluations. Importantly, however, instructor gender
does not seem to affect students’ decision to participate.17

2.5

Data on student course grades

The Dutch grading scale ranges from 1 (worst) to 10 (best), with 5.5 usually
being the lowest passing grade. If the course grade of a student after taking
the exam is lower than 5.5, the student fails the course and has the possibility
to make a second attempt at the exam. Because the second attempt is taken
two months after the first and may not be comparable to the first attempt, we
only consider the grade after the first exam.
Figure 2 shows the distribution of course grades in our estimation sample
by student gender and evaluation participation status. Grade distributions are
fairly similar for students who take part in the evaluations and those who do
not. The final course grade that we observe in the data is usually calculated
as the weighted average of multiple graded components such as the final exam
16

If we require non-missing values for GPA among those who respond, we only observe
26% of the total sample (where the total sample includes those where GPA is missing).
17

What we think is very important from a policy perspective is that the outcome of these
student evaluations – no matter how selective – may still have very real consequences for
instructors that get these systematically lower evaluations. To further understand what
possible bias arising from sample selection implies for the interpretation of our findings, we
believe it is useful to make the analogy to voting behavior: Any election suffers from selection
bias due to the citizens’ endogenous decision of whether to vote or not. Both for election
outcomes and teaching evaluation, we need to be concerned about observable outcomes, as
these are the ones which have real policy consequences, and not about potentially different
outcomes of populations we may have observed if everyone would have voted/participated.

14

grade (used in 90% of all courses), participation grades (87%), or the grade for
a term paper (31%).18 The graded components and their respective weights
differ by course, with the final exam grade usually having the highest weight.19
Exams are set by course coordinators. If at all, the section instructor only has
indirect influence on the exam questions or difficulty of the exam. Although
section instructors can be involved in the grading of exams, they are usually
not directly responsible for grading their own students’ exams. Instructors do,
however, have possible influence on the course grade through the grading of
participation and term papers, if applicable. Importantly, students learn about
all grade components only after course evaluations are completed. Therefore,
we do not think that results could be driven by students who retaliate for low
participation grades with low teaching evaluations.20

3

Conceptual framework

We next outline a conceptual framework to inform our discussion of what
motivates students when evaluating an instructor and where differences in
evaluation results due to gender could originate from. The purpose of this
section is not to provide a structural model. In our setting, which can be
18

While participation is a requirement in many courses, there is often no numerical participation grade, but instead a pass/fail requirement, which is implemented based on the
number of times a student attended the section. This is especially the case in large courses
with many sections. Information on how the participation requirement is implemented
across courses is, however, not systematically available in our data.
19

The exact weights of the separate grading components are not available in our data.
For all the courses for which we do have information, though, the weight of participation in
the final grade is between 0-15 percent.
20

To rule out that results are driven by a student response to a gender bias in the instructor’s grading of term papers, we estimated our main model for the subgroup of courses
that have no term papers. Table B1 in the Online Appendix shows that we find very similar
results for courses without term papers.

15

describes with equation (1), student i enrolls in a course, gets assigned to the
section of instructor j and evaluates the instructor with a grade from 1 (worst)
to 5 (best).

uij (k) = gradeij (k) − bi ∗ effortij (k) + ci ∗ experienceij (k)

(1)

We assume that student i obtains utility uij (k) in course k taught by
instructors j, which depends on three factors: (i) gradeij (k): the grade that
student i expects to obtains in course k when taught by j; (ii) effortij (k): the
amount of effort student i has to put into studying in course k with instructor
j and (iii) experienceij (k): a collection of “soft factors” which could include
“how much fun” the student had in the course, how “interesting the material
was,”– or how much the student liked the instructor. Students then evaluate
courses and give a higher evaluation to courses they derived higher utility
from.21 In particular, we assume that student i’s evaluation of course k taught
by instructor j is given by yij (k) = f (uij (k)), where f : R → {1, ..., 5} is a
strictly increasing function of uij (k).
We are interested in how the gender of instructor j affects student i’s evaluation, i.e., whether a given student i evaluates male or female instructors
differently. In our framework differences in the average student evaluations
for female and male instructors could thus be due to either different grades
(learning outcomes), different effort levels or due to different “experiences.”
Note that it is also possible that female and male students evaluate a given in21

There are two important factors to note. First, students in our institutional setting do
not know their grade at the moment of evaluating the course. However, they do presumably
know their learning success, i.e., whether they have understood the material and whether
they feel well prepared for the exam. Second, typical courses have one coordinator, who
typically determines the grade and the course material, but they are taught by different
instructors j across many sections of at most 15 students each (see Sections 2.1 and 2.5 for
details).

16

structor differently. This could be, for example, because the mapping f differs
between female and male students. While we are accounting for these types of
effects in our analysis using gender dummies for both students and instructors,
we are less interested in these effects. Typically we will hold student gender
fixed and assess how instructor gender affects the evaluation, yij (k).22 We will
discuss possible explanations for gender differences in evaluations in Section
5, where we also try to open the black box of “experience.”
We estimating the following model shown in Equation (2)
yi = αi + β1 · gT + β2 · gS + β3 · gT · gS + εi ,

(2)

We denote using gT and gS the dummy variables indicating whether instructors
(T ) and student (S) are female (g = 1) or not (g = 0).
The outcomes of interest we consider for yi are different subjective and objective performance measures. The coefficient β1 can be interpreted as the differential impact of female and male instructors on student experiences, grades
and effort, respectively. Analogously, β2 measures the difference between female and male students in fi , i.e., in the mapping from utility to evaluation,
plus the difference between female and male students in experience, grades and
effort. The factor β3 comprises the differential effects of the interaction between student and instructor gender. Since we do have measures of grades and
effort, we can identify the effect of gender on the soft category experience.
If two instructors perform equally well, gender differences in the experience
domain can, on the one hand, be due to outright discrimination, i.e., where a
student purposefully rates one instructor worse because of prejudice or dislike
22

One might be concerned whether some students confuse the section instructors with
the course coordinator in the evaluations. If this should be the case, our point estimates of
gender bias would be less precisely estimated due to measurement error.

17

of the instructor’s gender. Or, on the other hand, they could also reflect gender
differences in teaching style.23 There is also a grey area between outright discrimination and differences in teaching style, where students may associate a
certain teaching style (e.g., speaking loudly, displaying confidence) with better
teaching because these styles are associated with the gender that is thought
to be more competent. Nevertheless, it will be impossible for us to pin down
the exact mechanism. We will hence refer to gender differences in evaluations
which cannot be explained via grades or effort as “gender bias” without any
implication that these biases are due to discrimination.
We are particularly interested in comparing how an instructor’s gender
affects evaluations when holding student gender fixed. Do female students
evaluate female instructors differently than male instructors? And do male
students evaluate female instructors differently than male instructors? In particular, we test the following hypotheses:
H0 : No gender differences β1 = β2 = β3 = 0
H1 : Female students do not evaluate female and male instructors differently
β1 + β3 = 0.
H2 : Male students do not evaluate female and male instructors differently
β1 = 0.
H3 : Differences in teaching evaluations between male and female instructors
do not depend on student gender β3 = 0.
23

A highly stereotypical example would be that male instructors start each session with
a comment or joke about football, while female instructors do not. If all students who like
football then find this instructor more relatable, they may give him better evaluations that
could lead to gendered differences in evaluation results, despite not having any effect on
learning outcomes. We thank the editor for this example.

18

The most basic hypothesis H0 implies that there are no gender differences
in evaluations, neither with respect to instructor nor student gender. Hypothesis H1 implies that female students make no difference in how they evaluate
female or male instructors. H2 implies that male students do not evaluate
female and male instructors differently. Hypothesis H3 states that neither
female nor male students evaluate female or male instructors differently.

4

Main Results

To estimate the effect of the instructor gender on evaluations, we augment
Equation (2) by a matrix, Zitk , which includes additional controls for student
characteristics (student’s GPA, grade, study track, nationality, and age). The
inclusion of course fixed-effects and parallel course fixed-effects ensures conditional randomization and allows us to interpret the estimates of instructor
gender as causal effects (cf. Subsection 2.3). Standard errors are clustered at
the section level. Table 5 contains the results of estimating Equation (2) for
instructor-, group-, material- and course-related evaluation questions.

4.1

Effects on instructor evaluations

We start our analysis by looking at how instructor gender affects student
evaluations of instructor-related questions. The dependent variable in Column
(1) is the average of all standardized instructor-related questions. Column (1)
shows that male students evaluate female instructors 20.7% of a standard
deviation worse than male instructors. This effect size is equal to a difference
of 0.2 points on a five point Likert scale. Column (1) further shows that not
only male, but also female students evaluate instructors lower when they are
19

female. The sum of the coefficients β1 and β3 is smaller in size, but remains
statistically significant. Female students evaluate female instructors 7.6% of
a standard deviation worse compared to male instructors. The estimates in
Column (1) of Table 5 imply that all hypotheses H0-H3 have to be rejected.
Evaluations differ for all instructor-student gender combinations.
To understand the magnitude of these effects and assess their implications,
we conduct a number of exercises. First, we can hypothetically compare a male
and a female instructor who are both evaluated by a group which consists of
50% male students. In this setting the male instructor would receive a 14.2% of
a standard deviation higher evaluation than his female colleague. In contrast to
this, the gender difference in instructor evaluations would only be half the size
and equal to 7.6% of a standard deviation if all students were female. Finally,
if all students were male, the gender gap in evaluations would increases to
20.7% of a standard deviation.
Another illustration of the effect size is to calculate the evaluation rank of
all instructors within the same course and to compare it to their hypothetical
rank in the absence of gender bias.24 In the resulting ranking, the worst
instructor receives a 0 and the best instructor receives a 1. Female instructors
receive, on average, a 0.37 lower ranking than their male colleagues. When
correcting the ranking for gender bias, the gender gap almost closes, and the
difference decreases to 0.05 rank-points.
This exercise suggests that the lower ratings for female instructors translate
into substantial differences in rankings based on gender, which could manifest
in other outcomes which are (partially) influenced by these rankings. One
24

We calculate this ranking based on predicted evaluations using our model shown in
Column (1) in Table 5 once with and once without taking the instructor’s gender into
account.

20

example would be teaching awards, which are awarded annually at the SBE
in three categories (student instructors, undergraduate teaching, and graduate
teaching). The share of female teaching instructors in the three categories is
40%, 38%, and 32%, respectively, and the share of female instructors among
nominees is 15%, 26%, and 27%. Although there might be other reasons which
cause this under-representation of women among nominees, this evidence is in
line with our findings showing that female instructors receive substantially
lower teaching evaluations compared to their male colleagues.25

4.2

Robustness and Selective Response

The results documented in the previous section also hold when running the
regressions separately for male and female students (Table B2 in the Online
Appendix). Results also remain qualitatively the same when we estimate separate regressions for each of the evaluation questions of the teaching evaluation
survey (Table B3). We also find similar results when we estimate separate
models for high and low dispersion of responses within the evaluation questionnaire, which suggests that results are not driven by “careless” students who
“always tick the same box” when filling in the survey (Table B4)26 . When we
drop sections where the course coordinator is the section instructor, which
is the case for about 15% of our sample, we again find very similar results
(B5). Each of these robustness checks confirms the main finding that there is
25

Gender bias in teaching evaluations also implies that women are over-represented among
the lowest two ratings on the Likert scale, which can push them below thresholds for tenure
and promotion. When estimating the probability of instructors being rated in this category,
we find that women rated by male students are 40 percent (2.5 percentage points) more
likely to be in this category than men and 15 percent (9 percentage points) less likely to be
in the top two categories of the five-point Likert scale.
26

The bias displayed by male students is very similar across these two groups, and the
bias by female students is higher when the within-survey response dispersion is low.

21

a gender bias in teaching evaluations against female instructors, as shown in
Column (1) of Table 5.
To understand whether the results are due to selective participation in the
evaluation, we test whether survey response is selective with respect to observable characteristics. Table B6 shows that, although many of the observable
student characteristics are predictive of survey response, instructor gender is
not significantly correlated with the response behavior of male students (β1 ),
which are driving our main results. This effect is independent of the different
sets of included controls in Columns (2)-(5) of Table B6. The female student
response rate slightly increases when they have a female instructor (β1 + β3 ).
However, when controlling for students’ grades and GPA, this effect is not
significantly different from zero. Importantly, even if this effect would be statistically significant, it would not explain our main result: that male students
rate female instructors lower than male instructors.
As a second test to investigate whether results are driven by selective participation, we estimate a Heckman selection model. Table B7 in the Online
Appendix shows two versions of the Heckman selection model. The model
shown in Columns (1) and (2) does not contain an excluded variable and identifies effects off the functional form. The model in Columns (3) and (4) uses
students’ past response probability as an excluded variable, which should capture students latent motivation to participate in evaluations. The estimates
in both models are very close to the estimates shown in Column (1) of Table
5.27 The results show that a student’s decision to participate in the evaluation
does not depend on the instructor’s gender. Taken together, selective survey
27

To compare the results, Column (5) of Table B7 replicates Column (1) of Table 5.

22

response does not seem to be the driving mechanism behind gender bias in
teaching evaluations.

4.3

Effects on Other Evaluation Outcomes

After documenting gender differences for instructor-related evaluation questions, we next test whether there are also differences in other course aspects
that the students evaluate. In particular, we look at evaluation outcomes
which are related to the functioning of the group (Column (2) of Table 5),
the course material (Column (3)) and the course in general (Column (4)).
Although most of the items are clearly not related to the instructor, male
students still evaluate group-related items by 5.8%, material-related items by
5.7% and course-related items by 7.8% of a standard deviation worse when
they have a female instructor. On the 5 point Likert scale, these estimates
translate into a 0.07-0.1 lower evaluations score if the instructor is female.
This result is particularly striking as course materials are identical across all
sections of a given course and are clearly not related to the instructor’s gender.
While this may seem “proof” of discrimination at first sight, there are also
other potential explanations. On the one hand, even if the learning materials
are the same in a given course, it might still be possible that female and male
instructors teach the identical material in a systematically different way, which
makes the same material “seem worse.” One the other hand, since materialrelated question are asked after the questions about the instructor in the online
evaluation survey, it could also be possible that students “anchor” their responses to material-related questions on their previous answers regarding the
instructor.

23

4.4

Effects on Students’ Course Grades and Study Efforts

To understand whether these gendered differences in evaluation scores that we
document are indeed “biased” or due to women being worse teachers, we next
consider some objective measurements of instructor performance. We test for
performance differences by estimating Equation (2) with course grades and
students self-reported working hours as outcome variables.
We first analyze the variable grade, which is the grade obtained by the
student in the course. As mentioned before, students do not know their grade
at the time they submit their evaluation. Hence, we view the grade as an
indicator of learning outcomes in this course. To rationalize the lower evaluations of women, the effect of ‘female instructor’ on grades should be negative.
Column (1) of Table 6 shows that this is not the case. Being randomly assigned to a female instructor only has a very small positive and insignificant
effect on student grades, which does not rationalize the lower evaluations of female instructors. This implies that regardless of the reasons why students give
lower evaluations to women, female instructors do not cause inferior learning
outcomes.
Importantly, student course grades by instructors are not immediately
available to the SBE management that closely monitors student evaluations.
This implies that when management looks at these evaluations they will conclude that female instructors are doing worse on all aspects of teaching—most
likely without knowing that the objective learning outcomes of students are
not different.
While the grade obtained in the current course may serve as good proxy
for the direct instructor impact on student learning, one might be concerned
24

that assignment to female instructors has other, long-term effects that are not
picked up by the grade in the current course. To test this hypothesis, Column
(2) in Table 6 shows the results of regressing a student’s grades on the share
of female instructors in the previous term. Column (2) provides evidence that
the share of female instructors in the previous term does not significantly affect
current grades. This result holds for both male and female students. To test
even longer-term effects, Columns (3) to (5) of Table 6 test whether the share
of female instructors in the first year of study significantly affects grades in
subsequent years of the bachelor studies (Column (3)) and whether it affects
the GPA at the end of the first year (Column (4)) or at the end of a student’s
studies (Column (5)). For all these outcomes, we reject that instructor gender
significantly affects performance measures.28
We next test whether instructor gender affects student effort. Column
(6) of Table 6 shows that female students tend to study about one hour more
per week than male students. Importantly, instructor gender has no impact
on the number of study hours students report. Both β1 (bias of male students)
and β1 + β3 (bias of female students) show that having a female instructor has
only a very small and statistically insignificant effect on the number of study
hours spent on the course. This implies that students do not compensate for
the “impact” of instructor gender by adjusting their study hours.
Taken together, our results suggest that differences in teaching evaluations
do not stem from objective differences in instructor performance. Within our
framework in Section 3, instructor gender appears to have no impact on the
28

The number of observations in Column (3) of Table 6 is lower than in the main sample
since the regression is based on the subgroup of student grades in the second and third
bachelor year. In Columns (4) and (5), outcomes are defined at the student level instead of
the student-course level, and thus the number of observation is lower. Final GPA is only
observable for a subsample of bachelor students who we observe over their entire bachelor
studies in our data.

25

variables effort and grade. Male students do not receive lower course grades
when taught by female instructors, and they also do not seem to compensate
by working more hours. Following our conceptual framework, because the negative evaluation results must be coming from the loose category experience,
we conclude that the results stem from a gender bias. In the following section,
we will try to dig deeper into the mechanisms underlying these effects.

5

Mechanisms

5.1

Which Instructors are Subject to Gender Bias?

Given the finding that female instructors receive worse teaching evaluations
than male instructors from both male and female students−, which cannot
be rationalized by differences in grades or student effort−, it is important
to understand which underlying mechanisms drive this effect. We start this
analysis by investigating which subgroups of the population drive the effects.
We first assess which instructors are most affected by the bias.29 In Table
7, we group instructors in our sample into student instructors (Column (1)),
PhD students (Column (2)), lecturers (Column (3)), and professors at any
level (Column (4)). The overall results show that the bias of male students
is strongest for instructors who are PhD students. Female student instructors
receive 24% of a standard deviation worse ratings than their male colleagues
if they are rated by male students. Remarkably, female students rate junior
instructors very low as well. Junior female instructors receive evaluations
which are 13.6 − 27.4% of a standard deviation lower if they are rated by
29

Table B8 in the Online Appendix shows which instructor characteristics are correlated
with teacher gender. Female instructors are, on average, younger and less likely to be
full-time employed.

26

female students. These effects are much stronger than for the full estimation
sample.
The result that predominantly junior women are subject to the bias implies
that two otherwise comparable female and male job candidates would go on
the market with a significantly different teaching portfolio. We believe that
on the margin, for two otherwise equally qualified candidates this might make
a difference in particular at more teaching oriented institutions. Lecturers
and professors suffer less from these biases: Male students do not evaluate
male and female instructors differently at these job levels. Female students,
however, rate female professors 25.8% of a standard deviation higher than male
professors. One interpretation of this finding is that seniority conveys a sense
of authority to women that junior instructors lack. Even though students in
the Netherlands are usually rather young, the age difference between graduate
instructors and the students in the course is relatively small.
An alternative explanation for the finding that only junior instructors receive lower evaluations is that the effect is driven by selection out of the academic pipeline, which may be partly caused by the bias at the junior level. In
this scenario, only the best female instructors “survive” the competition and
reach the professor level. Thus, the only reason they receive similar ratings
compared to their male counterparts is that they are actually much better
teachers. Two pieces of evidence speak against the latter explanation. Table 8
shows differences in student effort (study hours) and student grades according
to the gender and seniority of the instructor.30 Neither of these two regres30

We provide further evidence on the effects on students’ effort and grades by instructor
and student seniority in Tables B9 and B10 in the Online Appendix. The tables show that
instructor gender affects outcomes only for specific combinations of students and instructor
seniority in grades and students’ effort.

27

sions support the idea that senior female instructors affect student outcomes
positively.
A different way of looking at instructor subgroups is to split the sample
based on instructor quality. One commonly used measure of teacher effectiveness in the education literature is “teacher value added.” We calculate teacher
added value based on a regression of students’ grades on their grade point
average, course and teacher fixed effects. The value of each teacher fixed effect
thus represents how much a specific instructor is able to add to the grade of
a student given the GPA of all previously obtained grades. Using the distribution of the teacher fixed effects, we calculate the quartiles of teacher value
added and run regressions for each of these subgroups. Table 9 shows that the
gender bias of male students is present in all three bottom quartiles. The fact
that the effect size is of similar magnitude in all three categories could also be
interpreted as an indication that teaching evaluations are only weakly linked
to the actual value added of female instructors.31

5.2

Gender Stereotypes and Stereotype Threat

One reason why students might have a worse experience in sections taught
by women is that they question the competence of female instructors. Alternatively, it could be that female instructors lack confidence or appear more
shy or nervous because of perceived negative stereotypes against them. This
31

The evidence in the literature on how student evaluations are related to teacher value
added is somewhat mixed. Rockoff and Speroni (2011) find a positive relationship, as we
do for male instructors. In Carrell and West (2010) and Braga et al. (2014), by contrast,
teaching evaluations are not positively related to teacher value added. None of these papers
explore gender interactions. Given that we have seen that there is little correlation between
teaching evaluations and value added for female teachers, this might be one reason for why
different results are observed in this literature. Table B11 in the Online Appendix shows
that teacher gender and VA are not significantly correlated in our setting.

28

in turn could affect students’ perception of the course and hence how female
instructors are rated. To evaluate these hypotheses, we first look at evaluation
differences in courses with and without mathematical content. When female
instructors teach courses with mathematical content, they risk being judged by
the negative stereotype that women have weaker math ability. To test this we
categorize a course as mathematical if math or statistics skills are described as
a prerequisite for the course. The reason we think that math-related courses
may capture stereotypes against female competence particularly well is that
there is ample evidence demonstrating the existence of a belief that women
are worse at math than men (see, e.g., Spencer et al. (1998) or Dar-Nimrod
and Heine (2006)).
Table 10 shows that for courses with no mathematical content, the bias
of both male and female students is slightly lower than the average. Male
students rate female instructors around 17% of a standard deviation lower
than their male counterparts in courses without mathematical content. For
female students the difference is only 4% and not statistically significant. For
courses with a strong math content, however, we find that the differences
are larger. Male students rate female instructors around 32% of a standard
deviation lower than they rate male instructors in these courses. For female
students the effect is also large: female students rate female instructors in
math-related courses around 28% of a standard deviation lower than they rate
male instructors in these courses.
To be able to say something about whether this sizeable difference by
course type comes from stereotypes of women’s competence or is maybe due
to the fact that women do teach these subjects worse than men, we look again
at student grades and students’ self-reported effort. Columns (3) and (4)
of Table 10 show that there are no differences in how much effort students
29

spend on a course based on the instructor’s gender. Columns (5) and (6) show
the impact on grades. Female students receive 6% of a standard deviation
higher grades in non-math courses if they were taught by a female instructor
compared to when they were taught by a male instructor. Whereas this might
be evidence for gender-biased teaching styles, it is not plausible that this is the
main reason for the gender bias we found for both male and female students
in courses with math content.
Finally, we ask whether the bias goes against female instructors in general
or women in particularly gender-imbalanced fields. We therefore estimate the
effect separately for courses with a majority of female and a majority of male
instructors. Table 11 shows that effect size is fairly comparable and goes in the
same direction for both groups. Despite our results for mathematical courses,
this suggests that the bias we identify is a bias against female instructors per
se rather than a bias against minority faculty teaching in gender-imbalanced
areas.32

5.3

Which students are most biased?

After documenting which instructors are most affected by the bias, we next ask
which type of students display stronger gender bias. B12 shows how results
differ by student seniority. The last column of the table shows that the bias
for male students is smallest when they enter university in the first year of
their bachelors and approximately twice as large for the consecutive years.
For female students, we find that only students in master programs give lower
evaluations when their instructor is female, but not otherwise. Strikingly, the
32

Coffman (2014) and Bohnet et al. (2015) show that gender bias can sometimes depend
on context-dependent stereotypes. This does not seem to be the case in our data.

30

gender bias of male students does not decrease as they spend more time in
university. In our setting, exposure to more women over time does not seem
to reduce bias as in Beaman et al. (2009).
As a final exercise, we analyze how the gender bias varies by the grade obtained in the course. Table B13 shows the estimates of how female instructors
affects a student’s evaluations across the distribution of student grades. Male
students appear relatively “consistent”. Although the bias becomes somewhat
smaller with higher course grades, students across the whole distribution make
significantly worse evaluations when their instructors are female (18% − 21%
of a standard deviation). For female students the bias is only present in the
bottom quartile of the grade distribution (13% of a standard deviation).

6

Conclusion

In this paper, we investigate whether the gender of university instructors affects how they are evaluated by their students. Using data on teaching evaluations at a leading School of Business and Economics in Europe, where students
are randomly allocated to section instructors, we find that female instructors
receive systematically lower evaluations from both female and male students.
This effect is stronger for male students, and junior female instructors in general, but in particular those in math related courses, consistently receive lower
evaluation scores. We find no evidence that these differences are driven by
gender differences in teaching skills. Our results show that the gender of the
instructor does not affect current or future grades nor does it impact the effort
of students, measured as self-reported study hours.
Our findings have several implications. First, teaching evaluations should
be used with caution. Although frequently used for hiring and promotion de31

cisions, teaching evaluations are usually not corrected for possible gender bias,
the student gender composition nor the fact that not all students participate
in evaluations. Furthermore, teaching evaluations are not only affected by
gender, but are also affected by other instructor characteristics unrelated to
teacher effectiveness, for example, by the subjective beauty of the teacher, as
shown by Hamermesh and Parker (2005). Second, our findings have worrying
implications for the progression of junior women in academic careers. Effect
sizes are substantial enough to affect the chances of women to win teaching
awards or negotiate pay raises. They are also likely to affect how women are
perceived by colleagues, supervisors and school management. For academic
jobs, where a record of teaching evaluations is required for job applications
and promotions, the differences we document are likely to affect decisions at
the margin. Such direct effects are presumably particularly important for adjunct instructors on teaching-only contracts. For academics with both research
and teaching obligations, indirect effects could be even more important. The
need to improve teaching evaluations is likely to induce a reallocation of scarce
resources away from research and towards teaching-related activities. Finally,
the impact of how teaching evaluations affect women’s confidence as teachers
should not be neglected. The gender bias we document works particularly
against junior instructors, who might be more vulnerable to negative feedback
from teaching evaluations than senior faculty. The fact that female PhD students are in particular subject to this bias might contribute to explaining why
so many women drop out of academia after graduate school.
Another worrying fact comes from the sample under consideration in this
study. The students in our sample are, on average, 20-21 years old. As graduates from one of the leading business schools in Europe, they will be occupying
key positions in the private and public sector across Europe for years to come.
32

In these positions, they will make hiring decisions, negotiate salaries and frequently evaluate the performance of their supervisors, coworkers and subordinates. To the extent that gender bias is driven by individual perceptions and
stereotypes, our results unfortunately suggest that gender bias is not a matter
of the past.

33

Figures
Figure 1: Time line of course assignment, evaluation, and grading.

Section 1 (14 students)
Section 2 (13 students)
Section 3 (13 students)
Section 4 (14 students)
136
students
in course

Section 5 (14 students)
Section 6 (13 students)

Course
Evaluation

Exam

Info

Section 7 (14 students)
Section 8 (14 students)
Section 9 (13 students)

Random
assignment
of students to
sections k

Students

Section 10 (14 students)

Students
experience
section, learning
outcome, effort

learn grade;

Course
evaluations

Students
write exams

Teacher
learns Course
Evaluation

Note: In this example, 136 students registered for the course and are randomly assigned to sections of 13-14
students. They are taught in these sections, exert effort and experience the classroom atmosphere. Towards
the end of the teaching block, they evaluate the course. Afterwards, they take the exam. Then the exam is
graded, and they are informed about their grade. Instructors learn the outcomes of their course evaluations
only after all grades are officially registered and published.

34

Figure 2: Distribution of grades by student gender and evaluation participation

.15
Fraction
.1
.05
0

0

.05

Fraction
.1

.15

.2

(b) Male students

.2

(a) Female students

2

4

6
Course grade

8

10

2

4

6
Course grade

8

10

Note: The figures show the distribution of final grades for female students (Panel (a)) and male students
(Panel (b)) who are participating in the teaching evaluation (gray bins) and those who do not (black bordered
bins). Grades are given on a scale from 1 (worst) to 10 (best), with 5.5 being the lowest passing grade for
most courses.

35

Tables
Table 1: Descriptive statistics – full sample and estimation sample
Female instructor
Female student
Evaluation participation
Course dropout
Grade (first sit)
GPA
Dutch
German
Other nationality
Economics
Business
Other study field
Master student
Age
Overall number of courses per student
Section size
Section share female students
Course-year share female students
Observations
Number of students
Number of instructors

(1)
Full sample
0.348
(0.476)
0.376
(0.484)
0.363
(0.481)
0.073
(0.261)
6.679
(1.795)
6.806
(1.202)
0.302
(0.459)
0.511
(0.500)
0.148
(0.355)
0.279
(0.448)
0.537
(0.499)
0.184
(0.388)
0.247
(0.431)
20.861
(2.268)
17.007
(8.618)
13.639
(2.127)
0.382
(0.153)
0.380
(0.089)
75,330
9,010
735

(2)
Estimation sample
0.344
(0.475)
0.435
(0.496)
1.000
(0.000)
0.000
(0.000)
6.929
(1.664)
7.132
(1.072)
0.278
(0.448)
0.561
(0.496)
0.161
(0.367)
0.256
(0.436)
0.593
(0.491)
0.152
(0.359)
0.303
(0.460)
21.077
(2.305)
17.330
(8.145)
13.606
(2.061)
0.391
(0.157)
0.386
(0.093)
19,952
4,848
666

(3)
p-values
0.122
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.011
0.000
0.000

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard deviations in parentheses. All characteristics except
“female instructor” refer to the students. Column (3) shows the p-values of the difference in characteristics
between students in the estimation sample, and students who are not part of the estimation sample.

36

Table 2: Instructor characteristics and evaluation by course type
(1)
Course type
Business
Instructor characteristics
Female instructor
Student instructors
PhD student instructors
Lecturer
Professor
Observations
Evaluation items
Instructor-related
Group-related
Material-related
Course-related
Study hours
Observations

(2)
Economics

(3)
Others

0.380
(0.486)
0.471
(0.500)
0.220
(0.415)
0.107
(0.309)
0.202
(0.402)
519

0.321
(0.468)
0.360
(0.481)
0.280
(0.450)
0.112
(0.316)
0.248
(0.433)
215

0.317
(0.467)
0.472
(0.501)
0.176
(0.382)
0.088
(0.284)
0.264
(0.443)
126

3.907
(0.919)
3.954
(0.853)
3.544
(0.810)
3.436
(0.722)
14.541
(8.213)
15,048

3.707
(0.958)
3.897
(0.854)
3.647
(0.750)
3.586
(0.698)
12.578
(7.450)
4,134

4.063
(0.797)
4.060
(0.833)
3.709
(0.823)
3.686
(0.736)
12.860
(7.348)
770

Note: Standard deviations in parentheses. Evaluation items are answered on a Likert scale from 1 (“very
bad”), over 3 (“sufficient”) to 5 (“very good”); study hours are measured as weekly hours of self-study.

37

38

Course FE
Parallel course FE
Observations
R-squared
F-stat controls=0
P-value

Constant

GPA

Other study field

Economics

Business

Age

Other nationality

German

Dutch

Female student

0.3519***
(0.0097)
YES
YES
75,330
0.3148

-0.0008
(0.0027)

(2)

0.3512***
(0.0100)
YES
YES
75,330
0.3148

0.0009
(0.0025)

(3)

0.3200*
(0.1744)
YES
YES
75,330
0.3148

-0.0008
(0.0035)

(4)

0.3940***
(0.0204)
YES
YES
72,376
0.3072

-0.0018**
(0.0008)

(5)

0.3175
(0.0000)
YES
YES
75,330
0.3148

-0.0014
(0.0000)

(6)

0.3165*
(0.1732)
YES
YES
75,330
0.3148

-0.0029
(0.0079)

(7)

0.3194*
(0.1742)
YES
YES
75,330
0.3148

0.0065
(0.0096)

(8)

0.0019
(0.0015)
0.3258***
(0.0142)
YES
YES
61,567
0.3168

(9)

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Dependent variable: Female instructor. Robust standard errors
clustered at the section level are in parentheses. Control variables refer to students’ characteristics.

0.3518***
(0.0098)
YES
YES
75,330
0.3148

(1)
-0.0002
(0.0030)

Table 3: Balancing test for instructor gender

0.0018
(0.0092)
-0.0134
(0.0172)
0.0016
(0.0015)
0.3719***
(0.0271)
YES
YES
60,200
0.3127
0.895
0.509

-0.0019*
(0.0010)

(10)
0.0000
(0.0034)
-0.0032
(0.0044)
-0.0004
(0.0042)

0.0116
(0.0188)
0.0012
(0.0300)
0.0001
(0.0030)
0.3398***
(0.0490)
YES
YES
19,952
0.3491
1.062
0.385

-0.0022
(0.0017)

(11)
0.0047
(0.0061)
-0.0015
(0.0044)
0.0135
(0.0083)

Table 4: Evaluation items

Instructor-related questions
“The teacher sufficiently mastered the course content” (T1)
“The teacher stimulated the transfer of what I learned in this course to other
contexts” (T2)
“The teacher encouraged all students to participate in the (section) group
discussions” (T3)
“The teacher was enthusiastic in guiding our group” (T4)
“The teacher initiated evaluation of the group functioning” (T5)
Average of teacher-related questions
Group-related questions
“Working in sections with my fellow-students helped me to better understand
the subject matters of this course” (G1)
“My section group has functioned well” (G2)
Average of group-related questions
Material-related questions
“The learning materials stimulated me to start and keep on studying” (M1)
“The learning materials stimulated discussion with my fellow students” (M2)
“The learning materials were related to real life situations” (M3)
“The textbook, the reader and/or electronic resources helped me studying
the subject matters of this course” (M4)
“In this course EleUM has helped me in my learning” (M5)
Average of material-related questions
Course-related questions
“The course objectives made me clear what and how I had to study” (C1)
“The lectures contributed to a better understanding of the subject matter of
this course” (C2)
“The course fits well in the educational program” (C3)
“The time scheduled for this course was not sufficient to reach the block
objectives” (C4)
Average of course-related questions
Study hours
“How many hours per week on the average (excluding contact hours) did you
spend on self-study (presentations, cases, assignments, studying literature,
etc)?”

(1)
Mean

(2)
Stand. Dev.

4.282
3.893

0.977
1.119

3.551

1.209

4.022
3.595
3.871

1.125
1.247
0.927

3.950

0.958

3.943
3.947

0.962
0.853

3.425
3.633
3.933
3.667

1.131
1.015
0.971
1.067

3.110
3.572

1.073
0.800

3.467
3.198

1.074
1.255

4.020
3.151

0.995
1.234

3.476

0.721

14.07

8.071

Note: Except for the number of study hours, all items are answered on a Likert scale from 1 (“very bad”), over
3 (“sufficient”) to 5 (“very good”). Statistics are calculated for the estimation sample (N = 19, 952). Missing
values of sub-questions are not considered for the calculation of averages. EleUM stands for Electronic
Learning Environment at Maastricht University.

39

Table 5: Gender bias in students’ evaluations
Dependent
variable
Female instructor (β1 )
Female student (β2 )
Female instructor * Female student (β3 )
Grade (first sit)
GPA
German
Other nationality
Economics
Other study field
Age
Section size
Constant
Observations
R-squared
β1 + β3

(1)
Instructorrelated
-0.2069***
(0.0310)
-0.1126***
(0.0184)
0.1309***
(0.0326)
0.0253***
(0.0058)
-0.0633***
(0.0089)
-0.0204
(0.0183)
0.1588***
(0.0220)
-0.0989**
(0.0500)
-0.0777
(0.0840)
0.0138***
(0.0045)
-0.0123
(0.0090)
-0.1065
(0.4320)
19,952
0.1961
-0.0760**
(0.0349)

(2)
Grouprelated
-0.0579**
(0.0260)
-0.0121
(0.0190)
0.0493
(0.0315)
0.0221***
(0.0059)
-0.0659***
(0.0088)
0.0129
(0.0186)
0.1162***
(0.0228)
-0.0116
(0.0534)
-0.1264
(0.0841)
-0.0141***
(0.0047)
0.0009
(0.0080)
-0.0021
(0.3165)
19,952
0.1559
-0.00855
(0.0292)

(3)
Materialrelated
-0.0570**
(0.0231)
-0.0287
(0.0178)
0.0265
(0.0297)
0.0442***
(0.0058)
-0.0377***
(0.0084)
0.0096
(0.0175)
0.2418***
(0.0222)
-0.0688
(0.0510)
-0.0566
(0.0806)
0.0037
(0.0044)
-0.0047
(0.0071)
0.4323
(0.3339)
19,952
0.2214
-0.0305
(0.0250)

(4)
Courserelated
-0.0780***
(0.0229)
-0.0373**
(0.0174)
0.0635**
(0.0293)
0.0528***
(0.0058)
-0.0227***
(0.0083)
-0.0518***
(0.0177)
0.0871***
(0.0218)
-0.1768***
(0.0529)
0.0031
(0.0724)
0.0064
(0.0045)
-0.0106
(0.0071)
-0.4096
(0.4434)
19,952
0.2360
-0.0145
(0.0244)

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All regressions include course fixed effects and parallel course
fixed effects for courses taken at the same time. Robust standard errors clustered at the section level in
parentheses. All independent variables refer to student characteristics.

40

Table 6: Effect of instructor gender on grades, GPA, and study hours
Dependent
variable
Female instructor (β1 )
Female student (β2 )
Female instructor * Female student (β3 )

(1)
Final
grade
0.0109
(0.0301)
-0.0155
(0.0221)
0.0288
(0.0401)

Share female instructors previous term

(2)
Final
grade

(3)
Final grades
2nd/3rd BA

(4)
First year
GPA

(5)
Final
GPA

0.0031
(0.0248)

0.0898
(0.0748)

0.0004
(0.0478)

0.0503
(0.0350)

0.1154
(0.1419)
-0.1158
(0.1950)
4.5961***
(1.0101)
YES
YES
5,838
0.4967
-0.000470
(0.135)

0.1216
(0.0825)
-0.0465
(0.1167)
-0.3812**
(0.1800)
NO
NO
2,107
0.8437
0.0750
(0.0850)

0.0546
(0.0583)
-0.0968
(0.0853)
3.1744***
(0.1511)
NO
NO
1,316
0.7968
-0.0422
(0.0628)

0.0592*
(0.0344)
-0.0061
(0.0480)

Share female instructors previous term * Female student
Share female instructors first year
Share female instructors first year * Female student
Constant
Course FE
Parallel course FE
Observations
R-squared
β1 +β3

(6)
Hours
spent
0.0445
(0.1701)
1.3446***
(0.1463)
-0.0832
(0.2412)

1.2756*
(0.6521)
YES
YES
19,952
0.4987
0.0397
(0.0305)

1.2714*
(0.7582)
YES
YES
19,386
0.5040
0.0531
(0.0383)

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Column (1) shows the effect of instructor and student gender on
course grades. Column (2) shows the effect of the share of female instructors in a student’s previous term on
final course grades in the current term. Columns (3) to (5) show the effect of share of female instructors in
the first year of studies on final course grades in the second and third year (Column (3)), the GPA at the end
of the first year of studies (Column (4)), and the GPA at the end of a student’s studies (Column (5)). The
unit of observation in Columns (1) to (3) and (6) is a student-course observation, the unit of observation
in Columns (4) and (5) is the student. In Column (2), the coefficient “Share female instructors previous
term” can be interpreted as β2 , and the interaction effect as β3 . In Columns (3) to (5), the coefficient
“Share female instructors first year” and its interaction effect can be interpreted as β2 and β3 , respectively.
All regressions include control variables for students’ characteristics (GPA, grade, nationality, field of study,
age). Columns (1), (2), (3) and (6) additionally control for section size. Robust standard errors are clustered
at the section level (Columns (1), (2), (3), (6)) and the student level (Columns (4), (5)).

41

8.2077
(5.4268)
YES
YES
19,952
0.2601
-0.0387
(0.198)

Table 7: Effect of instructor gender on instructor evaluation by seniority level.

Male Students (β1 )
Female Students (β1 + β3 )
Observations
R-squared

→ Increasing Seniority Instructors →
Student
PhD student Lecturer Professor
-.2379***
-.2798***
-.0392
.085
(.0642)
(.077)
(.0619)
(.1266)
-.274***
-.1359
.1232*
.2583**
(.0709)
(.0862)
(.0721)
(.1179)
5,352
4,801
5,700
4,099
.2839
.3261
.239
.4473

Overall
-.2069***
(.031)
-.076**
(.0349)
19,952
.1961

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Dependent variable: Instructor evaluation. All estimates are based
on regressions which include course fixed effects, parallel course fixed effects for the courses taken at the
same time, section size and other control variables for students’ characteristics (GPA, grade, nationality,
field of study, age). Robust standard errors clustered at the section level are in parentheses. The full table
with student seniority can be found in the Online Appendix (Table B12).

42

Table 8: Effect of instructor gender on study hours and grades – by instructor
seniority
Instructor sample
Female instructor (β1 )
Female student (β2 )
Female instructor * Female student (β3 )
Constant
Observations
R-squared
β1 +β3

Female instructor (β1 )
Female student (β2 )
Female instructor * Female student (β3 )
Constant
Observations
R-squared
β1 +β3

(1)
Students
-0.1118
(0.4043)
1.5197***
(0.3506)
-0.0672
(0.5333)
5.1718*
(2.6598)
3,903
0.2510
-0.179
(0.451)
0.0127
(0.0582)
-0.0599
(0.0548)
0.0972
(0.0778)
1.8356***
(0.4701)
3,903
0.5876
0.110*
(0.0620)

(2)
(3)
PhD
Lecturer
Panel 1: Study hours
-0.5641
0.5998*
(0.4424)
(0.3627)
1.4031*** 1.4296***
(0.3246)
(0.2847)
0.7397
-0.6481
(0.5235)
(0.4823)
4.2573
13.7381***
(4.0532)
(4.5454)
4,801
5,637
0.3490
0.2790
0.176
-0.0483
(0.501)
(0.422)
Panel 2: Grades
0.0241
-0.1013
(0.0812)
(0.0671)
0.0042
-0.0426
(0.0470)
(0.0439)
-0.1037
0.1125
(0.0817)
(0.0921)
1.1009*
0.4065
(0.6215)
(0.9223)
4,801
5,637
0.5426
0.5219
-0.0795
0.0112
(0.0879)
(0.0726)

(4)
Professors
0.4095
(0.9485)
0.6639*
(0.3840)
0.3154
(0.7858)
14.4064***
(4.0336)
4,082
0.4002
0.725
(0.875)
0.0775
(0.1731)
0.0023
(0.0581)
0.0399
(0.1233)
3.1903***
(0.6525)
4,082
0.5035
0.117
(0.153)

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All regressions include course fixed effects, parallel course fixed effects
for the courses taken at the same time, section size and other control variables for students’ characteristics
(GPA, grade, nationality, field of study, age). Robust standard errors clustered at the section level are in
parentheses.

43

Table 9: Effect of instructor gender on instructor evaluation by teacher’s valued
added quartile
(1)
Teacher value added
Female instructor (β1 )
Female student (β2 )
Female instructor * Female student (β3 )
Constant
Observations
R-squared
β1 + β3
Mean dependent variable

Quartile 1
-0.0723
(0.0822)
-0.1243***
(0.0404)
0.0806
(0.0666)
-0.0935
(0.5365)
4,994
0.3074
0.0083
(0.0840)
-0.1832

(2)
(3)
Instructor evaluation
Quartile 2 Quartile 3
-0.2945*** -0.2343***
(0.0780)
(0.0768)
-0.1285***
-0.0730*
(0.0326)
(0.0375)
0.1078
0.0988
(0.0691)
(0.0706)
0.5406
-0.3207
(0.5310)
(0.3751)
4,999
4,985
0.2780
0.3663
-0.187**
-0.135
(0.0835)
(0.0885)
0.0842
-0.0628

(4)
Quartile 4
0.0721
(0.0721)
-0.0580
(0.0377)
0.0977
(0.0608)
0.7977
(0.6052)
4,974
0.3625
0.170**
(0.0701)
0.0316

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Dependent variable: Instructor evaluation. Quartiles are based on
the teacher valued added, as estimated from a regression of students’ grades on their grade point average, and
teacher fixed effects. All regressions include course fixed effects, parallel course fixed effects for the courses
taken at the same time, section size and other control variables for students’ characteristics (GPA, grade,
nationality, field of study, age). Robust standard errors clustered at the section level are in parentheses.

44

Table 10: Effect of instructor gender on instructor evaluation, study hours,
and grades – by course content

Course content
Female instructor (β1 )
Female student (β2 )
Female instructor * Female student (β3 )
Constant
Observations
R-squared
β1 + β3

(1)
(2)
Instructor evaluation
No math
Math
-0.1717*** -0.3197***
(0.0329)
(0.0847)
-0.1063*** -0.1488***
(0.0216)
(0.0380)
0.1366***
0.0421
(0.0356)
(0.0867)
1.0299***
0.1286
(0.3507)
(0.5265)
14,843
4,820
0.1851
0.2239
-0.0351
-0.278***
(0.0380)
(0.0903)

(3)
(4)
Study hours
No math
Math
0.0192
0.1372
(0.1925)
(0.3919)
1.3544*** 1.2709***
(0.1767)
(0.2800)
-0.0700
-0.2207
(0.2754)
(0.5437)
4.6886
8.6955*
(4.3592)
(4.5853)
14,843
4,820
0.2682
0.2477
-0.0508
-0.0835
(0.229)
(0.406)

(6)
Grade
No math
Math
0.0170
0.0308
(0.0357)
(0.0516)
0.0174
-0.1225***
(0.0276)
(0.0374)
0.0433
-0.1071
(0.0468)
(0.0769)
-0.0429
0.9692
(0.7119)
(0.7809)
14,843
4,820
0.4730
0.6100
0.0603*
-0.0763
(0.0353)
(0.0590)

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All regressions include course fixed effects, parallel course fixed effects
for the courses taken at the same time, section size and other control variables for students’ characteristics
(GPA, grade, nationality, field of study, age). Robust standard errors clustered at the section level are
in parentheses. “Math” courses are defined as courses where courses require or explicitly contain math or
statistics prerequisites, according to the course description.

Table 11: Effect of instructor gender on instructor evaluation – by courses
with predominantly male / female instructors
Majority of instructors in the course is
Female instructor (β1 )
Female student (β2 )
Female instructor * Female student (β3 )
Constant
Observations
R-squared
β1 + β3

(1)
male
-0.1794***
(0.0391)
-0.1089***
(0.0201)
0.1042**
(0.0460)
0.2226
(0.4698)
14,296
0.2102
-0.0751
(0.0459)

(2)
female
-0.2711***
(0.0548)
-0.1584***
(0.0492)
0.2001***
(0.0613)
0.7011
(0.7831)
5,656
0.2048
-0.0710
(0.0623)

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All estimates are based on regressions which include course fixed
effects, parallel course fixed effects for the courses taken at the same time, section size and other control
variables for students’ characteristics (GPA, nationality, field of study, age). Robust standard errors clustered
at the section level are in parentheses.

45

(5)

References
Abrevaya, Jason, Daniel S. Hamermesh. 2012. Charity and favoritism in the field:
Are female economists nicer (to each other)? Review of Economics and Statistics 94(1) 202–207.
Anderson, Heidi M., Jeff Cain, Eleanora Bird. 2005. Online student course evaluations: Review of literature and a pilot study. American Journal of Pharmaceutical Education 69(1) 5.
Bagues, Manuel F., Berta Esteve-Volart. 2010. Can gender parity break the glass
ceiling? Evidence from a repeated randomized experiment. Review of Economic
Studies 77(4) 1301–1328.
Bagues, Manuel F., Mauro Sylos-Labini, Natalia Zinovyeva. 2017. Does the gender composition of scientific committees matter? American Economic Review
107(4) 1207–1238.
Basow, Susan A., Nancy T. Silberg. 1987. Student evaluation of college professors: Are female and male professor rated differently? Journal of Educational
Psychology 79(3) 308–314.
Beaman, Lori, Raghabendra Chattopadhyay, Esther Duflo, Rohini Pande, Petia
Topalova. 2009. Powerful women: Does exposure reduce bias? The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 124(4) 1497–1540.
Bennett, Sheila K. 1982. Student perceptions of and expectations for male and
female instructors: Evidence relating to the question of gender bias in teaching
evaluation. Journal of Educational Psychology 74 170–179.
Blank, Rebecca M. 1991. The Effects of Double-Blind versus Single-Blind Reviewing: Experimental Evidence from The American Economic Review. American
Economic Review 81(5) 1041–1067.
Bohnet, Iris, Alexandra van Geen, Max H. Bazerman. 2015. When performance
trumps gender bias: Joint versus separate evaluation. Management Science

46

62(5) 1225–1234.
Boring, Anne. 2017. Gender biases in student evaluations of teachers. Journal of
Public Economics 145 27–41.
Braga, Michela, Marco Paccagnella, Michele Pellizzari. 2014. Evaluating students’
evaluations of professors. Economics of Education Review 41 71–88.
Broder, Ivy E. 1993. Review of NSF economics proposals: Gender and institutional
patterns. American Economic Review 83(4) 964–970.
Carrell, Scott, James E. West. 2010. Does professor quality matter? evidence from
random assignment of students to professors. Journal of Political Economy
118(3) 409–432.
Centra, John A., Noreen B. Gaubatz. 2000. Is there gender bias in student evaluations of teaching? Journal of Higher Education 71(1) 17–33.
Coffman, Katherine Baldiga. 2014. Evidence on self-stereotyping and the contribution of ideas. Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(4) 1625–1660.
Croson, Rachel, Uri Gneezy. 2009. Gender differences in preferences. Journal of
Economic Literature 47(2) 448–474.
Dar-Nimrod, Ilan, Steven J. Heine. 2006. Exposure to scientific theories affects
women’s math performance. Science 314(5798) 435.
De Paola, Maria, Vincenzo Scoppa. 2015. Gender discrimination and evaluators’
gender: Evidence from the Italian academia. Economica 82(325) 162–188.
Elmore, Patricia B., Karen A LaPointe. 1974. Effects of teacher sex and student sex
on the evaluation of college instructors. Journal of Educational Psychology 66
386–389.
European Commission. 2009. She figures 2009: Statistics and indicators on gender
equality in science. Tech. rep., European Commission.
Feld, Jan, Ulf Zölitz. 2017. Understanding peer effects: On the nature, estimation
and channels of peer effects. Journal of Labor Economics 35(2).

47

Hamermesh, Daniel S., Amy Parker. 2005. Beauty in the classroom: Instructors’
pulchritude and putative pedagogical productivity. Economics of Education
Review 24 369–376.
Harris, Mary B. 1975. Sex role stereotypes and teacher evaluations. Journal of
Educational Psychology 67 751–756.
Hederos Eriksson, Karin, Anna Sandberg. 2012. Gender differences in initiation of
negotiation: Does the gender of the negotiation counterpart matter? Negotiation Journal 28(4) 407–428.
Heilman, Madeline E., Julie J. Chen. 2005. Same behavior, different consequences:
Reactions to men’s and women’s altruistic citizenship behavior. Journal of
Applied Psychology 90(3) 431–441.
Hernández-Arenaz, Iñigo, Nagore Iriberri. 2016. Women ask for less (only from
men): Evidence from alternating-offer bargaining in the field. Unpublished
manuscript.
Hoffman, Florian, Philip Oreopoulos. 2009. Professor qualities and student achievement. Review of Economics and Statistics 91(1) 83–92.
Kahn, Shulamit. 1993. Gender differences in academic career paths of economists.
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 83(2) 52–56.
Kaschak, Ellyn. 1978. Sex bias in student evaluations of college professors. Psychology of Women Quarterly 2 235–243.
Krawczyk, Michal W., Magdalena Smyk. 2016. Author’s gender affects rating of
academic articles - evidence from an incentivized, deception-free experiment.
European Economic Review 90 326–335. Mimeo.
Lalanne, Marie, Paul Seabright. 2011. The Old Boy Network: Gender Differences
in the Impact of Social Networks on Remuneration in Top Executive Jobs.
C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers 8623, Center for Economic and Policy Research.

48

Leibbrandt, Andreas, John A. List. 2015. Do women avoid salary negotiations?
Evidence from a large-scale natural field experiment. Management Science
61(9) 2016–2024.
Link, Albert N., Christopher A. Swann, Barry Bozeman. 2008. A time allocation
study of university faculty. Economics of Education Review 27 363–374.
MacNell, Lillian, Adam Driscoll, Andrea N. Hunt. 2015. What’s in a name: Exposing
gender bias in student ratings of teaching. Innovative Higher Education 40(4)
291–303.
Marsh, Herbert W. 1984. Students’ evaluations of university teaching: Dimensionality, reliability, validity, potential baises, and utility. Journal of Educational
Psychology 76(5) 707.
McDowell, John M., Larry D. Singell, James P. Ziliak. 1999. Cracks in the glass ceiling: Gender and promotion in the economics profession. American Economic
Review Papers and Proceedings 89(2) 397–402.
McElroy, Marjorie B. 2016. Committee on the status of women in the economics
profession (CSWEP). American Economic Review 106(5) 750–773.
National Science Foundation. 2009. Characteristics of doctoral scientists and engineers in the us: 2006. Tech. rep., National Science Foundation.
Potvin, Geoff, Zahra Hazari, Robert H. Tai, Philip M. Sadler. 2009. Unraveling
bias from student evaluations of their high school science teachers. Science
Education 93(5) 827–845.
Price, Joseph, Justin Wolfers. 2010. Racial discrimination among NBA referees.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 125(4) 1859–1887.
Rockoff, Jonah E., Cecilia Speroni. 2011. Subjective and objective evaluations of
teacher effectiveness: Evidence from new york city. Labour Economics 18 687–
696.

49

Shayo, Moses, Asaf Zussman. 2011. Judicial Ingroup Bias in the Shadow of Terrorism. Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(3) 1447–1484.
Spencer, Steven J., Claude M. Steele, Diane M. Quinn. 1998. Stereotype threat and
women’s math performance. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 35(1)
4–28.
Stark, Philip B., Richard Freishtat. 2014. An evaluation of course evaluations.
Science Open Research 9.
Tajfel, Henri, John C. Turner. 1986. The social identity theory of inter-group behavior . Chicago: Nelson Hall.
Van der Lee, Romy, Naomi Ellemers. 2015. Gender contributes to personal research
funding success in The Netherlands. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 112(40) 12349–12353.
Wennerås, Christine, Agnes Wold. 1997. Nepotism and sexism in peer-review. Nature 387(6631) 341–343.
Wu, Alice H. 2017. Gender stereotyping in academia: Evidence from economics job
market rumors forum. Unpublished manuscript.
Zölitz, Ulf, Jan Feld. 2017. The effect of peer gender on major choice and occupational segregation. Unpublished manuscript.

50

Online Appendix
Gender Bias in Teaching Evaluations (Friederike
Mengel, Jan Sauermann, and Ulf Zölitz)
(September 15, 2017)

Appendix A:

Figures

Figure A1: Screenshot of the scheduling software used by the SBE Scheduling
Department

Note: This screenshot shows the program Syllabus Plus Enterprise Timetable.

i

Appendix B:

Tables

Table B1: Gender bias in instructor evaluation – courses without course papers
as part of assessment
Female instructor (β1 )
Female student (β2 )
Female instructor * Female student (β3 )
Constant
Observations
R-squared
β1 + β3

(1)
-0.2443***
(0.0399)
-0.1209***
(0.0261)
0.1661***
(0.0439)
0.5718**
(0.2458)
11,014
0.2023
-0.0783*
(0.0467)

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Dependent variable: Instructor evaluation. All regressions include
course fixed effects, parallel course fixed effects for the courses taken at the same time, section size and other
control variables for students’ characteristics (GPA, grade, nationality, field of study, age). Robust standard
errors clustered at the section level are in parentheses.

ii

Table B2: Split sample regressions by student gender
(1)
Dependent
Instructor
variable
evaluation
Female students only
Female instructor
-0.0611
(0.0394)
Constant
0.2355
(0.4711)
Observations
8,673
R-squared
0.2547
Male students only
Female instructor -0.2099***
(0.0324)
Constant
-0.4334
(0.7079)
Observations
11,279
R-squared
0.2326

(2)
Grouprelated

(3)
Materialrelated

(4)
Courserelated

(5)
Hours
spent

(6)
Final
grade

0.0182
(0.0332)
-0.2477
(0.5204)
8,673
0.2232

-0.0180
(0.0284)
-0.5256
(0.3645)
8,673
0.3025

0.0048
(0.0272)
-1.3169**
(0.5684)
8,673
0.3066

-0.1787
(0.2297)
10.3959
(6.6159)
8,673
0.2888

0.0153
(0.0332)
0.3178
(0.7396)
8,673
0.5642

-0.0624**
(0.0275)
0.1020
(0.3236)
11,279
0.2022

-0.0634**
(0.0250)
0.8695*
(0.4608)
11,279
0.2598

-0.0753***
(0.0247)
0.0600
(0.5945)
11,279
0.2814

0.0676
(0.1822)
9.5223
(7.2705)
11,279
0.3102

0.0300
(0.0327)
2.2006***
(0.8279)
11,279
0.5071

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1 All regressions include course fixed effects, parallel course fixed effects
for the courses taken at the same time, section size and other control variables for students’ characteristics
(GPA, grade, nationality, field of study, age). Robust standard errors clustered at the section level are in
parentheses.

Table B3: Evaluations of graduate student instructors – by separate items
Evaluation item
Female instructor (β1 )
Female student (β2 )
Female instructor * Female student (β3 )
Observations
R-squared
β1 + β3

(1)
T1
-0.2180***
(0.0668)
-0.0576
(0.0408)
0.0332
(0.0655)
5,340
0.2537
-0.185***
(0.0711)

(2)
T2
-0.2445***
(0.0598)
-0.0039
(0.0396)
-0.0598
(0.0622)
5,337
0.2559
-0.304***
(0.0663)

(3)
T3
-0.1420**
(0.0555)
-0.0449
(0.0381)
-0.0384
(0.0579)
5,323
0.2302
-0.180***
(0.0611)

(4)
T4
-0.1913***
(0.0627)
-0.0406
(0.0382)
-0.0740
(0.0618)
5,346
0.2475
-0.265***
(0.0701)

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All estimates are based on regressions which include course fixed
effects, parallel course fixed effects for the courses taken at the same time, section size and other control
variables for students’ characteristics (GPA, nationality, field of study, age). The sample used in this
regression includes graduate student instructors only. Robust standard errors clustered at the section level
are in parentheses.

iii

(5)
T5
-0.1768***
(0.0521)
-0.0585
(0.0373)
-0.0109
(0.0573)
5,270
0.2809
-0.188***
(0.0603)

Table B4: Gender bias in students’ evaluations – by variation in response items

Female instructor (β1 )
Female student (β2 )
Female instructor * Female student (β3 )
Constant
Observations
R-squared
β1 + β3

(1)
Low Dispersion
(SD ≤ median)
-0.1718***
(0.0301)
-0.0544***
(0.0209)
0.0722*
(0.0375)
-0.5122
(0.4368)
9,992
0.2429
-0.0996***
(0.0351)

(2)
High Dispersion
(SD > median)
-0.2283***
(0.0478)
-0.1690***
(0.0310)
0.1756***
(0.0542)
0.2878
(0.4536)
9,960
0.2583
-0.0527
(0.0526)

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Dependent variable: Instructor evaluation. For defining individuals
as “low dispersion” and “high dispersion,” we calculated the standard deviation of a student’s answers
across all evaluation items within his or her evaluation sheet. Low dispersion (high dispersion) is defined
as evaluations with below-median (above-median) standard deviation. All regressions include course fixed
effects, parallel course fixed effects for the courses taken at the same time, section size and other control
variables for students’ characteristics (GPA, grade, nationality, field of study, age). Robust standard errors
clustered at the section level are in parentheses.

Table B5: Main results – excluding course coordinators
Dependent
variable
Female instructor (β1 )
Female student (β2 )
Female instructor * Female student(β3 )
Observations
R-squared
β1 +β3

(1)
Instructorrelated
-0.2223***
(0.0338)
-0.1218***
(0.0206)
0.1192***
(0.0350)
16,807
0.1945
-0.103***
(0.0380)

(2)
Grouprelated
-0.0495*
(0.0278)
-0.0015
(0.0211)
0.0192
(0.0337)
16,807
0.1527
-0.0303
(0.0314)

(3)
Materialrelated
-0.0538**
(0.0244)
-0.0322
(0.0196)
0.0167
(0.0319)
16,807
0.2179
-0.0372
(0.0267)

(4)
Courserelated
-0.0636***
(0.0242)
-0.0399**
(0.0192)
0.0469
(0.0313)
16,807
0.2290
-0.0167
(0.0259)

(5)
Hours
spent
0.0437
(0.1814)
1.4260***
(0.1609)
-0.1023
(0.2562)
16,807
0.2553
-0.0586
(0.209)

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.All regressions include course fixed effects, parallel course fixed effects
for the courses taken at the same time, section size and students’ characteristics (GPA, grade, nationality,
field of study, age). Robust standard errors clustered at the section level are in parentheses. Control variables
refer to students’ characteristics.

iv

(6)
Final
grade
0.0069
(0.0316)
-0.0215
(0.0242)
0.0402
(0.0428)
16,807
0.5082
0.0471
(0.0328)

Table B6: Determinants of survey response
(1)
Female instructor (β1 )
Female student (β2 )

0.0864***
(0.0037)

(2)
-0.0003
(0.0044)
0.0864***
(0.0037)

Female instructor * Female student (β3 )

(3)
-0.0067
(0.0052)
0.0804***
(0.0046)
0.0170**
(0.0076)

(4)
-0.0067
(0.0053)
0.0739***
(0.0048)
0.0174**
(0.0078)

0.3328***
(0.0028)
75,330
0.0580
0.0103
(0.00659)

0.0636***
(0.0045)
0.0710***
(0.0057)
-0.0140
(0.0124)
0.0782***
(0.0196)
-0.0004
(0.0011)
0.0004
(0.0016)
0.6316***
(0.2161)
72,376
0.0790
0.0107
(0.00675)

Grade (first sit)
GPA
German
Other nationality
Economics
Other study field
Age
Section size
Constant
Observations
R-squared
β1 +β3

0.3305***
(0.0021)
75,330
0.0580

0.3306***
(0.0026)
75,330
0.0580

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Dependent variable: Dummy variable for survey response. All
regressions include course fixed effects and parallel course fixed effects for the courses taken at the same
time. Robust standard errors clustered at the section level are in parentheses.

v

(5)
-0.0083
(0.0060)
0.0579***
(0.0054)
0.0181**
(0.0090)
0.0167***
(0.0015)
0.0437***
(0.0023)
0.0171***
(0.0052)
0.0627***
(0.0067)
-0.0063
(0.0135)
0.0809***
(0.0248)
0.0080***
(0.0014)
0.0009
(0.0018)
0.0610
(0.1294)
55,856
0.0878
0.00985
(0.00758)

vi
-0.0809**
(0.0335)

0.1400
-1.9086***
(0.1999)
(0.1044)
0.0295**
(0.0141)
-0.0626***
(0.0081)
55,856
0.0573

Response
-0.0234
(0.0172)
0.1666***
(0.0146)
0.0511**
(0.0246)

Model 1
Instructor evaluation
-0.2190***
(0.0299)
-0.1160***
(0.0175)
0.1380***
(0.0312)

-0.0820**
(0.0337)

0.2830
(0.2067)
-0.0497***
(0.0187)
-0.0608***
(0.0082)
54,530
0.2331

Model 2
Instructor evaluation
-0.2194***
(0.0300)
-0.1260***
(0.0178)
0.1374***
(0.0316)

(3)
Response
-0.0243
(0.0192)
0.0740***
(0.0162)
0.0519*
(0.0271)
1.7841***
(0.0184)
-2.1331***
(0.1188)

(4)

0.1682
-0.0814**
(0.0341)

19,952

0.1985
(0.2030)

(5)
Baseline
Instructor evaluation
-0.2185***
(0.0305)
-0.1191***
(0.0179)
0.1371***
(0.0318)

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All regressions include course fixed effects; the regression shown in
Column (5) also includes parallel course fixed effects for the courses taken at the same time. Column (5)
also includes individual FE. Robust standard errors clustered at the section level are in parentheses. All
regressions include course fixed effects, section size and students’ characteristics (GPA, grade, nationality,
field of study, age). Due to the large number of dummy variables, the regressions presented in this table do
not contain parallel course fixed effects for the courses taken at the same time. Control variables refer to
students’ characteristics.

Observations
Pseudo R-squared
R-squared
β1 +β3

ln σ

ρ

Constant

Mean past response

Female instructor * Female student (β3 )

Female student (β2 )

Female instructor (β1 )

(2)

(1)

Table B7: Selection of students into response (Heckman selection model)

Table B8: Instructor gender and instructor characteristics

PhD Student
Lecturer
Professor
Age
Non-Dutch
Full-time
Research fellow
Constant
Observations
R-squared

(1)
Female instructor
0.0265
(0.1013)
0.1034
(0.1098)
0.0101
(0.1116)
-0.0113***
(0.0032)
0.0695
(0.0538)
-0.1269**
(0.0644)
-0.0331
(0.0741)
0.7348***
(0.1332)
377
0.0921

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Dependent variable: Female instructor. Omitted category: student
instructors. Standard errors are in parentheses.

vii

Table B9: Effect of instructors gender on students’ study hours for male students (β1 ; Panel 1) and female students (β1 + β3 ; Panel 2) depending on
instructor and student seniority

1st year Bachelor
2nd year Bachelor and higher
Master
Overall
1st year Bachelor
2nd year Bachelor and higher
Master
Overall
1st year Bachelor
2nd year Bachelor and higher
Master
Overall

→ Increasing Instructor Seniority →
Student PhD student Lecturer Professor
Panel 1: Male Students (β1 )
-.4427
-.9951
.7791
-.7783
.6486
-1.638**
.2562
.3307
.9005
.8763
.2837
.2739
.0422
-.5641
.5847*
.3553
Panel 2: Female Students (β1 + β3 )
-.5078
.8947
1.0327
-3.6357
.0287
.6519
-1.2892**
-.6845
2.2919
-.5425
-.101
1.9685
-.1798
.1756
-.0659
.7007
Panel 3: Number of observations
2,183
1,218
1,634
307
2,515
1,876
2,659
1,505
654
1,707
1,407
2,287
5,352
4,801
5,700
4,099

Overall
-.1223
.0561
.2381
.0443
.0068
-.1887
.2086
-.0393
5,342
8,555
6,055
19,952

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Dependent variable: Students’ study hours. All estimates are based
on regressions which include course fixed effects, parallel course fixed effects for the courses taken at the
same time, section size and other control variables for students’ characteristics (GPA, grade, nationality,
field of study, age). Robust standard errors clustered at the section level are in parentheses.

viii

Table B10: Effect of instructors gender on grades for male students (β1 ; Panel
1) and female students (β1 + β3 ; Panel 2) depending on instructor and student
seniority

1st year Bachelor
2nd year Bachelor and higher
Master
Overall
1st year Bachelor
2nd year Bachelor and higher
Master
Overall
1st year Bachelor
2nd year Bachelor and higher
Master
Overall

→ Increasing Instructor Seniority →
Student PhD student Lecturer Professor
Panel 1: Male Students (β1 )
-.0218
-.0201
.0067
.0849
.0791
.0359
-.0057
.0337
.245
.0469
-.5009***
-.0168
.0419
.0241
-.092
.0751
Panel 2: Female Students (β1 + β3 )
.0788
-.0383
-.1035
-.2202
.1210
-.1954
.0582
.0515
.0900
-.0157
-.1449
.1882
.1000*
-.0795
.0123
.1163
Panel 3: Number of observations
2183
1,218
1,634
307
2,515
1,876
2,659
1,505
654
1,707
1,407
2,287
5,352
4,801
5,700
4,099

Overall
-.0119
.0681
-.0788
.0109
-.0091
.0546
.0188
.0397
5,342
8,555
6,055
19,952

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Dependent variable: Course grades. All estimates are based on
regressions which include course fixed effects, parallel course fixed effects for the courses taken at the same
time, section size and other control variables for students’ characteristics (GPA, nationality, field of study,
age). Robust standard errors clustered at the section level are in parentheses.

ix

Table B11: Value added, instructor gender, and students’ evaluations
(1)
-0.0380
(0.0511)

Female instructor

(2)
-0.0113
(0.0515)

Students’ evaluations
Constant
Instructor seniority Controls
Observations
R-squared

0.0856***
(0.0307)
NO
690
0.0008

0.0260
(0.0417)
YES
688
0.0185

(3)

(4)

0.0142
(0.0386)
0.0729***
(0.0249)
NO
688
0.0002

0.0051
(0.0385)
0.0187
(0.0367)
YES
687
0.0189

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Dependent variable: Teacher value added. Standard errors are in
parentheses. Unit of observation: instructor level.

Table B12: Estimates of gender bias in students’ evaluations of male students
(β1 ; Panel 1) and female students (β1 + β3 ; Panel 2) depending on instructor
and student seniority

1st year Bachelor
2nd year Bachelor and higher
Master
All students
1st year Bachelor
2nd year Bachelor and higher
Master
All students
1st year Bachelor
2nd year Bachelor and higher
Master
All students

→ Increasing Instructor Seniority →
Student
PhD student Lecturer Professor
Panel 1: Male Students (β1 )
-.1317
-.3521**
-.1072
.1001
-.3478***
.1518
-.0322
.1404
-.4691**
-.6316***
.204
-.0478
-.2379***
-.2798***
-.0392
.085
Panel 2: Female Students (β1 + β3 )
-.1537
-.2629
-.0403
.4645
-.4016***
.2286*
.1934*
.3941
-.5383**
-.4601***
.3482
.0787*
-.274***
-.1359
.1232*
.2583**
Panel 3: Number of observations
2,183
1,218
1,634
307
2,515
1,876
2,659
1,505
654
1,707
1,407
2,287
5,352
4,801
5,700
4,099

Overall
-.1275**
-.2404***
-.2507***
-.2069***
-.0607
-.0701
-.1179*
-.076**
5,342
8,555
6,055
19,952

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Dependent variable: Instructor evaluation. All estimates are based
on regressions which include course fixed effects, parallel course fixed effects for the courses taken at the
same time, section size and other control variables for students’ characteristics (GPA, grade, nationality,
field of study, age). Robust standard errors clustered at the section level are in parentheses. The full table
with student seniority can be found in the Online Appendix (Table ??).

x

Table B13: Gender bias in instructor evaluation – by student’s course grade
Student grades
Female instructor (β1 )
Female student (β2 )
Female instructor * Female student (β3 )
Constant
Observations
R-squared
β1 + β3

(1)
Quartile 1
-0.1788***
(0.0471)
-0.0914***
(0.0337)
0.0527
(0.0602)
0.3489
(0.6040)
7,004
0.2776
-0.126**
(0.0565)

(2)
Quartile 2
-0.2061***
(0.0539)
-0.0805**
(0.0382)
0.1307*
(0.0672)
0.9507**
(0.4142)
5,238
0.2933
-0.0753
(0.0596)

(3)
Quartile 3
-0.2102***
(0.0621)
-0.2042***
(0.0456)
0.1884**
(0.0773)
0.0746
(0.6777)
4,548
0.3068
-0.0219
(0.0647)

(4)
Quartile 4
-0.1969***
(0.0719)
-0.1272**
(0.0584)
0.1152
(0.0986)
-0.8966
(0.7197)
3,162
0.3374
-0.0817
(0.0855)

Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Dependent variable: Instructor evaluation. Quartiles are based on
the student’s grade in the course and are calculated at the course level. All regressions include course fixed
effects, parallel course fixed effects for the courses taken at the same time, section size and other control
variables for students’ characteristics (GPA, grade, nationality, field of study, age). Robust standard errors
clustered at the section level are in parentheses.

xi

