SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE
PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE

In some professions, women have become well
represented, yet gender bias persists—Perpetuated
by those who think it is not happening
C. T. Begeny1*, M. K. Ryan1,2, C. A. Moss-Racusin3, G. Ravetz4,5
In efforts to promote equality and combat gender bias, traditionally male-occupied professions are investing
resources into hiring more women. Looking forward, if women do become well represented in a profession,
does this mean equality has been achieved? Are issues of bias resolved? Two studies including a randomized
double-blind experiment demonstrate that biases persist even when women become well represented (evinced
in veterinary medicine). Evidence included managers evaluating an employee randomly assigned a male (versus
female) name as more competent and advising a $3475.00 higher salary, equating to an 8% pay gap. Importantly,
those who thought bias was not happening in their field were the key drivers of it—a “high risk” group (including
men and women) that, as shown, can be readily identified/assessed. Thus, as other professions make gains in
women’s representation, it is vital to recognize that discrimination can persist—perpetuated by those who think
it is not happening.

INTRODUCTION

1
Department of Psychology, University of Exeter, Exeter, England, UK. 2Faculty of
Economics and Business, University of Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
3
Department of Psychology, Skidmore College, Saratoga Springs, New York, USA. 4British
Veterinary Association, London, England, UK. 5Simplyhealth, Andover, England, UK.
*Corresponding author. Email: c.begeny@exeter.ac.uk

Begeny et al., Sci. Adv. 2020; 6 : eaba7814

26 June 2020

bias continues to be an issue in professions where women’s representation has now substantially increased. Thus, it remains unclear
whether addressing the issue of women’s underrepresentation in a
profession is a reliable indicator that issues of gender bias and differential treatment are now resolved.
Moreover, and quite critically, we examine whether any persisting gender bias is broadly evident, or whether it is perpetuated by a
particular subset of individuals. Specifically, we test whether those
who believe that women in their field no longer face bias are, perhaps ironically, the most likely to convey biased perceptions and
evaluations. While such a belief may seem reasonable to adopt,
especially upon seeing women’s representation in the field grow
(a very real and notable stride toward gender equality), it may actually
make one more susceptible to conveying bias.
We examine these processes in a profession once heavily male-­
dominated but now with a substantial representation of women,
veterinary medicine. Following a preliminary field survey, we conducted a randomized double-blind experiment using a sample of
business owners, employers, and managers in the profession—
individuals who are in real positions of power to evaluate and shape
the experiences and careers of women and men in their field.
Is gender bias still a problem after women become
well represented?
With an increase in women’s representation, it is possible that issues
of gender bias will dissipate. This may occur through change in professional culture, including shifts in the perceptions of women’s
abilities [e.g., others may not so readily assume (consciously or
otherwise) that women in that field are less capable than men nor
struggle to recognize women’s skills and achievements] (18). Consistent with this perspective, evidence shows that in professions
where women are well represented, there is very little bias in how
male versus female employees are evaluated (4). However, this evidence comes from professions where women’s representation has
been relatively stable over time (e.g., nursing and social work), so it
does not evince whether such bias will exist in professions where
the gender composition has substantially changed. Nevertheless, it
1 of 10

Downloaded from https://www.science.org on November 08, 2022

Women remain underrepresented in a number of professions, including certain fields of science, technology, engineering, mathematics,
and medicine (STEMM) (1–3). Evidence also indicates that women
who work in these male-dominated fields are prone to experiencing bias
and discrimination. This bias can be expressed by both men and women
and can have multiple adverse implications (e.g., for women’s pay and promotion, performance evaluations, and treatment among colleagues) (4–13).
However, efforts are underway in many of these fields to increase
the representation of women (14–16). In part, this has meant working to address the so-called pipeline problem—the idea that in some
professions, one of the obstacles to gender equality is a lack of women
pursuing degrees and ultimately careers in them. Such efforts to increase women’s representation may be motivated partly by a belief
that once enough women enter the profession, broader issues of bias
and inequality will subside (e.g., because having more women in the
profession “will naturally lead to a more inclusive culture”) (17).
Following from this, if someone sees women become well represented
in a profession (e.g., biological sciences and veterinary medicine), they
may infer that the profession has indeed become more equitable—
that the biases and differential treatment that once disadvantaged
women are no longer an issue.
In the current research, we examine the veracity of this idea. We
test whether gender bias (differential evaluations and treatment of
women relative to men) is now absent or remains evident in a profession once dominated by men but now with a substantial representation of women. While existing evidence suggests that gender
bias persists in professions still comprised mostly of men (4, 7), there
is very little evidence—and none to our knowledge that comes from
randomized double-blind experimental data coupled with large-scale,
highly ecologically valid field survey data—indicating whether gender

Copyright © 2020
The Authors, some
rights reserved;
exclusive licensee
American Association
for the Advancement
of Science. No claim to
original U.S. Government
Works. Distributed
under a Creative
Commons Attribution
NonCommercial
License 4.0 (CC BY).

SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE
provides some indication that when women’s representation in a
field is relatively high, gender bias may not be an issue.
On the other hand, it is possible that despite women becoming
well represented, gender biases will persist. This may be because there
are commonly held assumptions in many cultures that men are more
capable than women (19), which can give way to biases that disadvantage women [or advantage men (20)] (21). Importantly, everyone
is susceptible to internalizing these stereotypical perceptions, including
women and men and those who reject overtly sexist attitudes
(19, 22, 23). Moreover, regarding perceptions of women in scientific
fields, evidence shows that even when the proportion of women
working in those fields is relatively high, gender stereotypes that
favor men (as being more suitable or fitting to the field) can persist
(24, 25). Thus, given that certain gender stereotypes may remain unchanged by the proportion of women working in that field, overt
expressions of gender bias and discrimination might also persist.
Consistent with this perspective, albeit from an educational context
rather than the workplace [see also (26)], there is evidence of bias in
competence evaluations of female (versus male) undergraduates in
biology (27). Given that women now earn undergraduate degrees
in biology at rates equal to or greater than men (28, 29), this suggests
that biased evaluations of women can persist even when women’s
representation in that context has grown.

Begeny et al., Sci. Adv. 2020; 6 : eaba7814

26 June 2020

The current studies
In the current studies, we use a preliminary field survey (study 1)
and preregistered randomized double-blind experiment (study 2)
to test whether gender biases are evident in a profession once male-­
dominated but now with a substantial representation of women.
We also test whether those who believe discrimination against women
in their field is no longer an issue are the most likely to express gender
bias (study 2). We test these questions using samples of women and
men working in the field of veterinary medicine (U.K.-based). In
1960, only 5% of U.K. vets were women; by 2017, it was more than
50% (paralleling trends in the United States) (2, 37, 38). This professional context offers a rather conservative test of whether gender
biases will still be evident. This is, in part, because women have been
well represented among vets for some time (representing 50%+ of
vets for more than a decade) (39), and so, in this time, more traditional, biased perceptions and assumptions of women’s abilities in
the field (e.g., lacking competence) may have faded. Thus, given this
passage of time, it would seem particularly unlikely that gender
biases would be evident, compared to fields where women have
only more recently reached greater representation. Moreover, in
fields where the gender composition is only now shifting, individuals
may feel more imminent threat and thus express more overt hostility or negative reactance toward women (40). Yet, in veterinary
medicine, this type of perceived threat would seem less likely given
that women’s sizable representation has been established for more
than a decade. This enables a relatively clean test of extant subtle
biases, distinct from discriminatory evaluations rooted in overt
hostility (see also the “Study 2 supplemental analyses” section in the
Supplementary Materials).
2 of 10

Downloaded from https://www.science.org on November 08, 2022

A paradox: Those who think bias is no longer a problem may
be most likely to express it
Once women become well represented in a profession, gender bias
may also remain evident because that very shift in gender composition, that growth in the number of women, may lead people to more
readily infer (perhaps erroneously) that discrimination is now a
thing of the past [for a related perspective, see (30)]. This idea aligns with
previous work suggesting that individuals who hold this type of belief—
that women no longer face discrimination in society more generally—
tend to lack awareness of the ways in which discrimination toward women
can manifest contemporarily, and often subtly (31, 32). It follows
that if individuals are unaware of the subtle manifestations of gender
bias, they would also be less likely to recognize circumstances in
which biases might be guiding their own perceptions and evaluations
of an individual. In this way, if individuals infer that a robust representation of women means that gender bias is no longer an issue in
their profession, they may inadvertently increase their susceptibility
of expressing gender bias—a seeming paradox that arises from perceiving progress on gender equality within one’s profession, or, more
precisely, one that arises from misperceiving the true level of progress
that has been reached on gender equality (i.e., overestimating the
progress that has been made).
This process may be particularly evident in fields of science and
medicine, where objectivity is highly valued and routinely practiced
as the basis for making observations and evaluations. This is because
individuals who feel confident in their capacity to be objective can
be especially prone to expressing bias (33, 34). Thus, this process—
whereby gender bias is driven by those who think bias is no longer
an issue—may be particularly evident in professions where objectivity is routinely practiced and thus readily assumed to underlie
one’s perceptions and evaluations. Overall, this perspective aligns
with research demonstrating that academics in science disciplines
who think discrimination against women is no longer an issue in
society are especially prone to displaying gender bias—evaluating a
female undergraduate as less competent than an equally qualified

male student (5). This similarly aligns with research showing that
when scientific evaluation committees believe discrimination against
women in science is no longer an issue (and hold implicit gender
biases), they demonstrate greater gender bias—promoting fewer
women to elite research positions (35).
The current research builds on this previous body of work in
several innovative ways. In part, it examines a profession where women
are now well represented rather than a mixture of fields where gender
representation varies (e.g., physics and biology). Therefore, it is
poised to determine whether increasing women’s representation in
a field does represent a robust strategy for eliminating gender bias.
It also more precisely examines individuals’ beliefs about whether
gender bias is an issue within their own field [rather than in society
more generally or across an array of scientific disciplines (focused
on those where women remain underrepresented)].
To find evidence of gender bias under these conditions would
reveal several unique insights. First, it would show that establishing
a strong representation of women does not equate to resolving issues
of gender inequality in a profession. This would seem particularly
important to consider, given that concerted efforts are underway in
a number of fields to increase women’s representation (14, 36). Second,
quite critically, it would demonstrate that believing gender equality
has been achieved within one’s own field may be a key risk factor for
expressing gender bias—a risk factor that can be easily measured and
can be readily acknowledged and discussed with those who hold
such a belief. Therein, as a practical implication, such insights could
aid in the development of targeted bias interventions designed to
maximize effectiveness among those who are most likely to demonstrate gender bias.

SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE

Begeny et al., Sci. Adv. 2020; 6 : eaba7814

26 June 2020

issue (i.e., the proportion of managers who hold beliefs that put them
at higher risk for exhibiting gender bias).
To help maximize interest and engagement in the study, managers
were contacted directly by the BVA. They were told that the BVA
was a collaborative partner and that the “survey” aimed to understand their experiences with “managing others in the veterinary
profession...[and] to gain insights about how managers...work with
other vets to develop successful and thriving practices” (for more
details, see the “Study 2 data collection procedures and participant
information” section in the Supplementary Materials). While it was
imperative to provide managers with a fictitious performance review, so to isolate employee gender as the only experimental factor,
managers were told that the performance review was real, was
recently completed, and was provided by a BVA-affiliated clinic
(upon completion of the study, managers were fully debriefed).
Thus, we took several steps to ensure that the study and its stimuli
were realistic and engaging. For more details on the applicability of
these experimental data to current issues in the profession (e.g., an
extant pay gap), see Discussion.
Figure 1 provides a conceptual overview of predictions. Overall,
we expect that gender-biased evaluations will remain evident in
fields once male-dominated but now with a substantial represent­
ation of women, including veterinary medicine. Critically, however,
this bias will be evident primarily among those who believe women
in their field do not experience bias anymore (such that a male
employee will be evaluated as having greater competence than an

Female employee
(compared to male employee)

Those who Believe Women
in the Profession
Do Not Face Discrimination

Those who Believe Women
in the Profession
Still Face Discrimination

Evaluated as less competent

Poorer treatment of employee
Provide fewer opportunities

Offer less encouragement

e.g., to take on new managerial
responsibilities

e.g., to pursue promotions, other
opportunities for advancement

Fig. 1. Conceptual model illustrating that in professions once male-dominated,
now with a strong representation of women, gender-biased evaluations of an
employee’s competence will persist. These biased evaluations will favor a male
employee over an otherwise identical female employee and be evident among
those in the profession who believe discrimination against women in their profession
is no longer an issue. Biased evaluations will subsequently translate into biased
treatment of the employee.
3 of 10

Downloaded from https://www.science.org on November 08, 2022

Study 1
In study 1, we tested for preliminary evidence of extant biases toward
women in the profession. We analyzed data from a field survey of
professionals in veterinary medicine (N = 1147; 66% female). Individuals were asked (i) how often they experience gender discrimination at work (e.g., are treated according to stereotypes) and (ii) the
extent to which they feel their overall competence and value is recognized by colleagues (e.g., being admired and highly regarded among
colleagues). We predicted that women would experience greater
discrimination and less value/admiration among colleagues compared
to men statistically matched on various characteristics.
Study 2
Given that study 1 relied on self-reported experiences, in study 2,
we aimed to provide confirmatory evidence by using a controlled
experimental design. To test whether male and female vets would
be evaluated differently based solely on their gender, we showed
managers in the profession a performance review of a vet, randomly
assigned a male or female name (“Mark” or “Elizabeth”). Everything
about this vet—qualifications, experience, past performance, and
merits—were identical, aside from the vet’s purported gender. The
review described a vet whose performance reflected a mix of positive qualities and drawbacks, thereby creating some ambiguity
about the vet’s overall competence [consistent with previous research (5); see also (41)]. To ensure the performance review was
realistic, it was developed collaboratively with the British Veterinary
Association (BVA).
To assess whether any potential bias would be driven by those
who think bias is not an issue anymore, managers reported whether
they believe women in their field still face bias [endorsement of the
statements, “Discrimination against women in the veterinary profession is no longer a problem”; “In this profession, the careers of
female vets are still impacted by biases and discrimination toward
women” (reverse-scored)]. To minimize potential influence of this
measure on evaluations of the target vet, it was administered after
managers provided their evaluations. Administering this measure
beforehand would have posed a risk to the ecological validity of the
results (e.g., by priming managers, in an unrealistic way, to actively
consider the possibility of extant gender biases in their profession;
this could induce self-monitoring and yield less natural evaluations).
Note that managers randomly assigned to the male versus female
target conditions did not differ in their endorsement of this belief,
t252 = 0.81, P = 0.42 (for more details, see Materials and Methods).
This suggests that having managers first evaluate the target did not
systematically alter their endorsement of this belief.
To maximize external validity, we recruited managers, employers,
business owners, and others in the profession with managerial experience (N = 254, 122/132 assigned to male/female target conditions),
92% of whom were actively involved in conducting or overseeing
performance reviews. This sample of (volunteer) managers is valuable
for several reasons. First, these individuals are in real positions of
power, making evaluations of others in their field. This yields high
external validity. Therefore, findings provide meaningful, real-world
implications. Second, individuals who have actual experience with
workplace evaluations tend to show less bias compared to more
convenient samples (e.g., undergraduate students) (4), which means
that this sample provides a particularly conservative test of predictions. Third, this sample provides insight into the range of real-world
beliefs that managers have about whether women in their field still
face bias, thus providing real insight into the scope of the potential

SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE
identical female employee). In addition, we expect that gender-­
biased evaluations will be reflected in differential treatment of the
employee, specifically the types of treatment that are grounded in
perceptions of an employee’s competence. This more distinctive
treatment includes providing opportunities to take on unique supervisory responsibilities (if s/he was under one’s management) and other
tasks that exact a relatively distinct level of ability or competence.
RESULTS

Study 2: Corroborating experimental evidence of
gender bias
We analyzed study 2 data using PROCESS (42), controlling for
managers’ differing characteristics. Experimental condition (target
gender; X) was coded 0 (female/“Elizabeth”) and 1 (male/“Mark”), and
managers’ beliefs about ongoing gender discrimination in their field
(M) were examined at ±1 SD (mean-centered; so to examine X➔Y |
M). The distribution of these beliefs yielded values at ±1 SD of approximately 2.55/5.59 (M = 4.07; 1 to 7 scale; for descriptive clarity,
values here are not mean-centered). This corresponded to a general
rejection versus endorsement of the idea that women in their profession no longer face discrimination. Thus, these values are meaningful not only because they reflect true values in the population but
also because they represent categorically distinct beliefs about the
existence of gender discrimination in the field.
Prevalence of beliefs about gender bias in the profession
Initial descriptive analyses revealed that a plurality of managers believed that gender discrimination was no longer an issue in their
profession [scoring above the scale’s midpoint (neither agree nor
disagree)]. Specifically, 44.5% of managers believed this, of whom
61.1% were men. Another 40.6% of managers rejected this belief
(scoring below the midpoint), of whom 23.3% were men. Another
15.0% were neutral/uncertain (scoring at the midpoint), of whom
42.1% were men. Further analyses showed that while both men and
women endorsed this belief (and rejected it), men were significantly
Begeny et al., Sci. Adv. 2020; 6 : eaba7814

26 June 2020

4 of 10

Downloaded from https://www.science.org on November 08, 2022

Study 1: Preliminary self-reported evidence of gender bias
We analyzed study 1 data using a multivariate analysis of covariance,
comparing the experiences of women and men in the profession
while controlling for relevant factors (e.g., role in the profession and
hours worked per week). Results demonstrated that women’s experiences differed from those of their male counterparts overall, F2,1141 =
29.25, P < 0.001, d = 0.45. Specifically, women (M = 2.08, SD = 1.09)
were more likely than men (M = 1.58, SD = 0.78) to experience discrimination, F1,1142 = 54.83, P < 0.001, d = 0.44. Women (M = 4.50,
SD = 1.22) were also less likely than men (M = 5.03, SD = 1.12) to
experience recognition among colleagues for their value and worth,
F1,1142 = 8.25, P = 0.004, d = 0.17. Thus, results provided initial evidence that despite notable gains in women’s representation in this
field, experiences of gender bias may persist.
Study 1 provided direct insight into how women’s experiences
working in this field differ from those of their male counterparts.
However, the self-reported nature of these data made it vital to test for
corroborating experimental evidence—specifically testing whether
gender bias remained evident when examining others’ evaluations
of an individual (versus an individual’s self-reports) and when comparing evaluations of two individuals who are truly identical in every
way, aside from their gender. Study 2 did exactly that in a randomized double-blind experiment.

more likely to endorse it (and women more likely to reject it), 2 (1) =
31.34, P < 0.001. Similarly, examining endorsement on a continuum
(versus categorically) showed that men’s endorsement of this belief
(M = 4.75, SD = 1.33) was significantly greater than women’s (M =
3.56, SD = 1.45), t252 = 6.72, P < 0.001, d = 0.85.
Note that in analyses testing whether male versus female managers
differed in their tendency to show biased evaluations of the target
vet (testing managers’ gender as a moderator; analyses otherwise
paralleled primary analyses described below), we found no evidence
of differences between male and female managers (for more details,
see the “Study 2 supplemental analyses” section in the Supplementary
Materials). Rather, as described below, managers’ biased evaluations
of the target vet were squarely rooted in their belief that women in
the profession no longer face discrimination.
Evaluations of competence
Paralleling previous work (5), the performance review was designed
to create ambiguity about the target employee’s competence, and so,
primary analyses tested whether managers’ competence evaluations
differed as a function of the target’s purported gender and whether
such a difference was evident squarely among those who believe
gender bias is no longer an issue in the profession. Predictions were
tested in PROCESS model 1 with 5000 resamples (95% confidence
intervals in brackets).
Analyses of the first competence indicator (overall competence)
evinced differences in the perceived competence of the male versus
female employee but only among those who believed gender bias
was no longer an issue: condition*bias-belief, B = 0.20 [0.05, 0.35],
SE = 0.08, P = 0.01, R2 = 0.03 (F1,227 = 6.58), f 2 = 0.03 (main effects:
condition, B = 0.17 [−0.06, 0.41], SE = 0.12, P = 0.14; bias-belief,
B = −0.08 [−0.16, 0.00], SE = 0.04, P = 0.06). Managers who rejected
this belief did not differ in their competence evaluations of the male
and female target employee (X➔Y = −0.13 [−0.46, 0.20], SE = 0.17,
P = 0.44). By comparison, managers who endorsed it—those who
believed women in their profession no longer experience bias—
demonstrated a systematic bias, evaluating the male employee as
significantly more competent than the otherwise identical female
employee (X➔Y = 0.48 [0.15, 0.80], SE = 0.17, P = 0.004; Fig. 2).
As another indicator of the perceived competence and worth of
this employee, managers indicated the extent to which they anticipated this employee was valued, admired, and looked up to among
colleagues (paralleling the measure of perceived value/worth among
colleagues from study 1). Mirroring the effect described above, results
evinced differences in how the male versus female employee was
evaluated, specifically among managers who believed gender bias
was no longer an issue: condition*bias-belief, B = 0.27 [0.11, 0.44],
SE = 0.08, P = 0.001, R2 = 0.04 (F1,236 = 10.84), f 2 = 0.05 (main
effects: condition, B = 0.09 [−0.16, 0.34], SE = 0.13, P = 0.47; bias-­
belief, B = 0.02 [−0.07, 0.11], SE = 0.05, P = 0.62). Again, while those
who rejected this belief did not differ in their evaluations of the male
and female target (X➔Y = −0.33 [−0.68, 0.03], SE = 0.18, P = 0.07),
managers who believed gender bias is no longer a problem evaluated
the male employee as having greater value and worth than the otherwise identical female employee (X➔Y = 0.51 [0.16, 0.86], SE = 0.18,
P = 0.005).
As a monetary indicator of perceived competence and worth
(paralleling previous work) (5), managers indicated the salary they
would advise for this employee if s/he was in their own practice.
Managers also reported the typical salary for employees in their
practice with similar levels of experience as the target, and this was

SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE

£3000

Female employee ("Elizabeth")
Male employee ("Mark")

θX

Y

= £2564.23, P = 0.002

[£946.78, £4181.69]

Advised salary (deviation scores)

£2500
£2000
θX

£1500

Y

= 2£303.07, P = 0.72

[2£1942.79, £1336.65]

£1000
£500
£0
2£500

subtracted from the advised salary. Thus, analyses accounted for
differences in base salary rates by examining respondent-specific
deviations in advised salary (the same pattern of results emerged
when analyzing raw advised salaries with typical salary used as a
covariate; see the “Study 2 supplemental analyses” section in the
Supplementary Materials). Mirroring the effects described above,
results evinced bias in advised salaries, specifically among managers
who believed gender bias was no longer an issue: condition*bias-belief,
B = £934.98 [£183.01, £1686.95], SE = £381.55, P = 0.02, R2 = 0.03
(F1,220 = 6.00), f 2 = 0.03 (main effects: condition, B = £1130.58
[−£19.61, £2280.77], SE = £583.61, P = 0.05; bias-belief, B = £56.89
[−£357.81, £471.58], SE = £210.42, P = 0.79). Thus, while those who
rejected this belief did not differ in advised salaries (X➔Y = −£303.07
[−£1942.79, £1336.65], SE = £832.00, P = 0.72), managers who
endorsed it advised paying the male employee ~£2564 or $3475 more
than the otherwise identical female employee (X➔Y = £2564.23
[£946.78, £4181.69], SE = £820.71, P = 0.002; Fig. 3). This equated to
a gender pay gap of approximately 8% or, more formally, unequal
pay of 8% (for equally qualified workers). As a more direct translation, this equated to paying the male employee ~$1.75 more than
the female employee every hour for the next 2000 consecutive hours
or one full year of work. A second measure of perceived financial
worth (willingness to offer the employee a raise) showed the same
pattern of results: condition*bias-belief, B = 0.35 [0.07, 0.63], SE =
0.14, P = 0.01, R2 = 0.02 (F1,235 = 6.02), f 2 = 0.02 (main effects:
Begeny et al., Sci. Adv. 2020; 6 : eaba7814

26 June 2020

Holding the Belief that
Women in the Profession
Do NOT
Face Discrimination

Fig. 3. Managers’ advised salary for the target employee, by the purported
gender of the employee and managers’ beliefs about whether women in their
profession still face discrimination (n = 229). To account for individual differences
in base salary rates, managers reported the typical salary in their practice for
employees with similar experience as the target, and this was subtracted from the
advised salary; thus, any differences in base salary rates (can be substantial across
different regions of the country) were accounted for by analyzing respondent-specific
deviations in advised salary. Y-axis values therefore represent deviations in advised
salary (from individually adjusted base salary). A value of £0 indicates that managers
advised paying the target employee the same as others in their practice with comparable experience. Among managers who believe discrimination against women
is no longer an issue, they advised that the male employee receive a higher salary
than the otherwise identical female employee. Analyses probed the interaction (by
managers’ beliefs) at ±1 SD. These values correspond to a general endorsement/
rejection of these beliefs. For ease of interpretation and because the values represent categorically distinct beliefs, they are presented as bars (estimated means at
±1 SD with covariates at their sample means). The differences in means correspond
to the following values: “Holding the Belief that Women in the Profession Do Still
Face Discrimination,” X➔Y = −£303.07, SE = £832.00, P = 0.72 [−£1942.79, £1336.65];
“Holding the Belief that Women in the Profession Do NOT Face Discrimination,”
X➔Y = £2564.23, SE = £820.71, P = 0.002 [£946.78, £4181.69]. For an analogous
depiction with the above confidence intervals (around the conditional effect of
target gender, X➔Y | M), see fig. S3.

condition, B = −0.02 [−0.45, 0.41], SE = 0.22, P = 0.93; bias-belief,
B = −0.12 [−0.27, 0.04], SE = 0.08, P = 0.13), although the difference
in offered pay raise by target gender was not significant among those
who rejected (X➔Y = −0.55 [−1.16, 0.06], SE = 0.31, P = 0.08) or
endorsed (X➔Y = 0.52 [−0.09, 1.12], SE = 0.31, P = 0.09) beliefs
about women still facing bias in the field.
Last, to produce a more robust indicator of competence and
worth, as in previous work (5), the four aforementioned competence
indicators were standardized and averaged to form a composite.
Consistent with results for each individual measure, this composite
measure evinced differences in competence evaluations among
those who believed gender discrimination was no longer an issue:
condition*bias-belief, B = 0.22 [0.11, 0.33], SE = 0.06, P < 0.001, R2 =
0.06 (F1,213 = 15.10), f 2 = 0.07 (main effects: condition, B = 0.12
[−0.05, 0.30], SE = 0.09, P = 0.16; bias-belief, B = −0.04 [−0.10, 0.03],
SE = 0.03, P = 0.27). Again, while those who rejected this belief
did not differ in their evaluations of the male and female employee
5 of 10

Downloaded from https://www.science.org on November 08, 2022

Fig. 2. Evaluations of employee competence (general measure) by the purported
gender of the target employee and managers’ beliefs about whether women
in their profession still face discrimination. Scale is 1 to 7 (n = 236); higher values
indicate higher competence evaluations. Among managers who believe discrimination against women is no longer an issue, the male employee was evaluated as more
competent than the otherwise identical female employee. Analyses probed the
interaction (by managers’ beliefs) at ±1 SD. These values correspond to a general
endorsement/rejection of these beliefs. For ease of interpretation and because the
values represent categorically distinct beliefs, they are presented as bars (estimated
means at ±1 SD with covariates at their sample means). The differences in means
correspond to the following values: “Holding the Belief that Women in the Profession
Do Still Face Discrimination,” X➔Y = −0.13, SE = 0.17, P = 0.44 [−0.46, 0.20]; “Holding
the Belief that Women in the Profession Do NOT Face Discrimination,” X➔Y = 0.48,
SE = 0.17, P = 0.004 [0.15, 0.80]. For an analogous depiction with the above confidence
intervals (around the conditional effect of target gender, X➔Y | M), see fig. S2.

Holding the Belief that
Women in the Profession
Do Still
Face Discrimination

SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE
response options ranged from advising s/he pursue the position
within the next year, to advising that s/he would not be ready to take
on this position anytime in the next 6 years). Results mirrored those
described above. The employee’s gender had a significant indirect
effect (direct effect: B = −0.20 [−0.49, 0.08], SE= 0.14, P = 0.16) on
the advice managers would give, favoring the male employee, but
only among those who believed gender bias was no longer an issue:
indirect effect = 0.27 [0.10, 0.49]. Among managers who rejected
this belief, the employee’s gender had no significant bearing on the
advice s/he would be given (indirect effect = −0.13 [−0.30, 0.00]).
DISCUSSION

The current studies provide evidence that gender biases can persist
even in a field where women have made substantial gains in their
representation. This evidence comes from ecologically valid field
survey data combined with controlled experimental data, which also
uses ecologically valid respondents—managers and others who are
in actual positions of power to evaluate and shape the careers of
women and men in their field. Moreover, and quite critically, this
research demonstrates that managers who think bias is no longer an
issue in their profession are, perhaps ironically, the key drivers of bias.
Together, our research provides several unique insights. In part,
it demonstrates that when women’s representation in a field substantially increases, it cannot be taken to indicate that issues of gender
bias have been resolved. This may be particularly important to consider as we see concerted efforts underway in a number of STEMM
fields to increase women’s representation (14, 36). While gender
biases may be even more pervasive when women are highly underrepresented, and so increasing women’s representation in these fields
may be beneficial in some respects, the current studies indicate that
making progress on “the numbers” should not be considered a robust
or adequate solution to issues of gender inequality. In fact, the current
evidence indicates that when a field (or particular organization in it)

Belief that Women
in the Profession
No Longer
Face Discrimination
+
Employee’s
gender

(0 female, 1 male)

+

Evaluation of
employee’s
competence

Positive
(distinctive)

+

treatment of
employee

Managers who believe women in their profession…
do still face discrimination (21 SD)

Indirect effect = 20.17 [20.38, 0.01]

do NOT face discrimination (+1 SD)

Indirect effect = 0.36 [0.16, 0.62]

Fig. 4. Managers’ differential treatment of the target employee, as a function of the employee’s purported gender and managers’ (biased) evaluations of the
employee’s competence (rooted in their belief that women in the profession no longer face discrimination) (n = 222). Managers’ competence evaluations were key
to predicting how they would treat the employee {e.g., willingness to let her/him take on more supervisory responsibilities and be more involved in managing the business/
financial side of the practice (if s/he was in their practice); B = 0.77 [0.56, 0.98], SE = 0.11, P < 0.001}. However, these competence evaluations were themselves systematically
biased among those who thought gender bias was no longer an issue (condition*bias-belief, B = 0.22 [0.11, 0.33], SE = 0.06, P < 0.001), which translated into differential,
discriminatory treatment. In other words, there was a significant indirect effect of target gender on treatment but only among those who believed that gender bias was
no longer an issue: indirect effect = 0.36 [0.16, 0.62]. Among managers who rejected this belief, the employee’s gender had no bearing on how s/he would be treated
(indirect effect = −0.17 [−0.38, 0.01]).
Begeny et al., Sci. Adv. 2020; 6 : eaba7814

26 June 2020

6 of 10

Downloaded from https://www.science.org on November 08, 2022

(X➔Y = −0.22 [−0.47, 0.03], SE = 0.13, P = 0.08), managers who
endorsed it evaluated the male employee as more competent than
the otherwise identical female employee (X➔Y = 0.47 [0.22, 0.71],
SE = 0.12, P < 0.001).
Competence evaluations predict treatment of the employee
With evidence that managers’ own beliefs about extant gender biases
undergird their likelihood of expressing gender-biased evaluations,
further analyses tested whether managers’ biased competence evaluations translated into biased treatment of the employee (if s/he was
in their own practice; e.g., whether they would let her/him take on
more supervisory responsibilities). Specifically, moderated mediation
(model 7, using competence composite measure) tested for an indirect effect of employee gender on managers’ intended treatment of
the employee, via perceived competence—an effect expected to
be evident among those who thought gender discrimination was no
longer an issue in their field.
Results demonstrated just that. While managers’ competence evaluations were critical to predicting how they would treat the employee
overall (B = 0.77 [0.56, 0.98], SE = 0.11, P < 0.001), these competence
evaluations were themselves systematically biased among those who
thought gender bias was no longer an issue (condition*bias-belief,
B = 0.22 [0.11, 0.33], SE = 0.06, P < 0.001), which translated into
biased treatment. In other words, there was a significant indirect effect of target gender on treatment (direct effect: B = −0.17 [−0.45,
0.11], SE = 0.14, P = 0.24) but only among those who believed gender
bias was no longer an issue: indirect effect = 0.36 [0.16, 0.62]. Among
those who rejected this belief, the employee’s gender had no significant bearing on how s/he would be treated (indirect effect = −0.17
[−0.38, 0.01]; Fig. 4).
As a second indicator of how managers would treat this employee,
they were asked to indicate what advice they would give if the employee expressed interest in pursuing a key promotion in the near
future. Specifically, they were asked how readily they would encourage
her/him to seek this promotion (to the position of principal vet;

SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE

Begeny et al., Sci. Adv. 2020; 6 : eaba7814

26 June 2020

should be treated based on their competencies and merits. However,
despite seeming like a fair standard to maintain, it can be an insidious
one. This is because the very foundation of that standard—perceptions
of an employee’s competence—can be fundamentally biased.
Last, it is important to note that while there is a considerable
amount of research, and debate, around whether gender bias plays
a role in explaining women’s underrepresentation in certain fields
(46), the current research focally speaks to a different question.
Rather than focusing on the antecedents of women’s representation
in a profession, this research examines whether gender bias plays a
role even after issues of women’s representation have largely been
resolved. In this way, it helps address a distinct and more forward-­
looking question: When a traditionally male-dominated field ultimately establishes a strong representation of women, will those
women—having already surpassed any potential barriers to entering
the field—finally be on an equal footing with their male colleagues?
Will they have the same opportunities to thrive and face the same
challenges to advancement? Overall, the current research indicates
that this is not the case. Even when well represented, women can
continue to face unique challenges in how they are perceived, evaluated, and treated because of their gender.
Going forward, it will be important to examine how and why
individuals come to believe that gender bias is no longer an issue in
their field. While the current studies demonstrate clear consequences
of holding this belief, it does not examine its antecedents. Given
the context in which these consequences are demonstrated—a field
where women’s representation has grown—and given that several
professions are now making efforts to increase women’s represent­
ation, it may be particularly valuable to assess whether individuals
seeing the number of women in their field grow (i.e., subjectively
perceiving growth) is partly what gives rise to this belief. Finding that
this belief becomes more likely or prominent when women’s representation perceptibly grows would illustrate how gains in women’s
representation—a very real and notable stride toward equality—can
also give way to an insidious belief that undermines equality. Future
study of this and other related processes would ultimately benefit
from a mixed methodological approach, including additional experimental work (e.g., manipulating the perceived representation of
women in a profession and manipulating individuals’ belief that
gender bias is still an issue), and from studying other relevant professions (e.g., biological sciences and medical fields where women’s
representation has grown).
Similarly, it will be important to consider for whom an increase
in women’s representation yields a belief that gender bias is no longer
an issue and, by comparison, for whom this belief will exist irrespective of women’s representation. In line with past theorizing (32), some
individuals may genuinely, though perhaps naïvely, infer from seeing a growth in women’s representation that gender bias is no longer
an issue. Thus, for these “naïve deniers” of extant bias, seeing
women’s representation increase would be key to producing the
belief. However, these individuals can also have a genuine motivation to promote gender equality (32). This is important because
it suggests that awareness raising interventions may be effective in
changing their beliefs and ultimately the discrimination that, as
shown, can accompany this belief (i.e., for naïve deniers, effective
interventions may include increasing awareness of extant forms of
gender bias, and awareness that thinking bias does not exist makes
them more likely to express it). By comparison, other individuals
may not be naïve deniers so much as “motivated deniers” of extant
7 of 10

Downloaded from https://www.science.org on November 08, 2022

makes gains in women’s representation, they may need to take additional precautions to ensure that this does not get interpreted to
mean that gender bias is no longer a problem. While this may seem
like a reasonable inference to make, our results show that to make
such an inference actually puts an individual at higher risk for
demonstrating gender bias.
Following from this, the current research illustrates that an individual’s beliefs about gender equality in their field may be a notable,
and readily measurable, risk factor. Those who believe gender bias
is no longer an issue in their profession, or who generally underestimate its pervasiveness, may be at highest risk for exhibiting such
bias. This is a key insight, with practical implications. For example,
this may be important for understanding and precisely identifying
who in the profession is perpetuating the ongoing gender pay gap
(43). It is also notable that the actual pay gap in veterinary medicine
(approximately 8% for junior full-time vets) closely mirrors the one
found in the current research. This high degree of consistency, between the magnitude of the real-world issue and the current findings,
also suggests that while managers in this study were not evaluating
a real employee (with real implications for themselves or the employee), their evaluations may nevertheless mirror real-world evaluations and treatment of their employees [e.g., managers’ actual
perceptions of employees’ competence and the salaries they advise
for (prospective) employees]. The gender-biased evaluations shown
in the current experiment also generally map onto women’s lived
experiences of discrimination in the profession, as evinced in study
1. Thus, together, this suggests that both the results and particular
insights of the current research—including that those who believe
gender bias is no longer an issue in their profession are at highest
risk for perpetuating it—will be vital to understanding, and ultimately
addressing, extant issues of gender bias in the profession.
There are both men and women who believe that discrimination
against women is no longer an issue in their profession (in the current research, 45% of managers held this belief, 66% of whom were
men), and it is the belief itself, not one’s gender, that predicts who is
most likely to demonstrate gender bias (see also the “Study 2 supplemental analyses” section in the Supplementary Materials). Although it will be important to further probe the nature of this gender
bias effect in future research {e.g., for whom it is explained by a
genuine naiveté of extant forms of gender discrimination versus a
more explicit motivation to deny that gender discrimination still
exists [in line with ideas put forth in literature on system justification (44, 45) and modern sexism (31, 32)]}, it is critically informative that simply holding this belief that gender discrimination is no
longer an issue in one’s own field reveals a pattern of robustly biased
evaluations of women. When considering how to develop targeted
gender bias interventions, it seems particularly useful to have identified this risk factor—a belief that is explicit, is easily measured, is
profession specific (and thus likely to be relevant to individuals), and
can be readily acknowledged and discussed with those who hold it.
In addition, the current research shows that biased competence
evaluations can translate into differential treatment of an employee.
It is also informative that managers in the current research did
not directly indicate differential treatment of an employee based on
gender but instead indicated that they would treat an employee based
on his or her perceived competence. Critically, however, these competence evaluations were themselves systematically biased (among
those who thought gender bias was no longer an issue). This suggests that managers may overtly value the notion that employees

SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Study 1 design
Individuals in the field of veterinary medicine completed a semiannual
survey organized and distributed by the BVA. The survey was designed for the BVA’s own internal purposes but also included study
1 questions. Individuals were asked how often they experience gender
discrimination at work [three items, adapted from (47): treated
according to stereotypes based on your gender, deprived of opportunities available to others because of your gender, and viewed negatively because of your gender; 1 (Never) to 5 (Very often);  = 0.88]
and the extent to which they feel their overall value and worth is
recognized by colleagues [four items, adapted from (48): extent to
which they dis/agree that they are, among colleagues: held in high
regard, seen as a role model for others, looked up to, and admired;
1 (Strongly disagree) to 7 (Strongly agree) scale;  = 0.93].
Study 1 aimed to examine the experiences of individuals currently
working in the profession, so individuals not working were omitted.
The sample for analyses (N = 1170, n = 1147 for main analysis, as
some did not respond to all questions) was 66.8% female, 87.4%
working in clinical practices, and 83.8% working full-time (35+ hours
per week; Mage = 42.57, SD = 11.91). On average, individuals had
Begeny et al., Sci. Adv. 2020; 6 : eaba7814

26 June 2020

graduated from veterinary school 16.87 years ago (SD = 12.65).
Roles in the sample, following a coding scheme from the BVA,
reflected employees (62.4%), managers of other vets (5.5%), and
self-employed/business owners/partners (32.1%). All respondents
indicated that they work alongside other employees and thus had a
basis for answering questions about their experiences among colleagues
(responding “yes” to, “In your current role do you work alongside
colleagues or other employees?”). While sample size was determined/
managed by the BVA, sensitivity analyses indicated the study was
powered to detect effects within the range of those found (e.g., d ≥
0.17 in analysis of variance with covariates;  = 0.05, 1 −  = 0.80).
Study 1 statistical analyses
We compared the experiences of women and men in the profession
using a multivariate analysis of covariance (covariates: role/position
in the profession, hours worked per week, and years since graduating
from vet school). We used an  level of 0.05 (two-tailed) for analyses
(no data transformations). Effect sizes computed in SPSS were converted using established equations (49).
Study 2 design
Using a randomized double-blind experimental design, managers
and others with managerial experience (e.g., business owners and
employers) in veterinary medicine were shown a performance review
of a vet—randomly assigned a male or female name (with corresponding male or female pronouns used). The review described a
junior vet whose past performance reflected a mix of qualities and
drawbacks, thus creating ambiguity about the vet’s overall competence.
Figures S1 and S2 show the performance review (male version) and
cover story that preceded it. Everything about this vet was identical
aside from their gender. Thus, any differences in managers’ evaluations of the vet’s competence could be attributed to the vet’s gender.
After omitting respondents who did not match inclusion criteria
[e.g., those without managerial experience, n = 12; those who failed
manipulation checks (the correct name/gender of the target employee
they evaluated; n = 15 assigned to the male target condition, n = 18
assigned to female target condition)], there were 254 respondents
(57.1% female; 89.4% in clinical practice; Mage = 45.78, SD = 10.93).
On average, respondents entered the veterinary profession (graduated
from vet school) 23 years ago (SD = 11.21). When asked about years
of managerial experience in the profession, 46% reported having
more than 10 years of experience. Another 12, 10, 13, 5, and 9%
reported having 7 to 10, 5 to 7, 3 to 5, 2 to 3, and 1 to 2 years of
managerial experience. The remaining 6% had less than 1 year of
experience. Asked about their current involvement conducting and/or
overseeing performance reviews, 79% reported being “very” or “quite
involved.” Another 13% reported being “somewhat” or “a little involved.”
Only 8% reported no current involvement. When comparing managers
randomly assigned to the two experimental conditions on these demographic variables, they did not differ in any way (all Ps > 0.10).
See the “Study 2 data collection procedures and participant information”
section in the Supplementary Materials for more information on
recruitment, power, and methodology.
Study 2 measures
To reinforce the target employee’s gender, questions about the
employee regularly used his/her name and corresponding gender
pronouns. Questions are described here using the male version.
The female versions were identical except for the name (Elizabeth)
8 of 10

Downloaded from https://www.science.org on November 08, 2022

bias. Such individuals may strategically use information, including
about women’s representation but also other selective information
or ideas, to justify what is more fundamentally a sexist, anti-egalitarian
attitude [in line with theorizing around modern sexism (31, 32) and
system justification] (44). For motivated deniers of extant bias,
women’s representation in a field is less central to determining
whether they hold the belief (though a growth in women’s representation could certainly strengthen it) because, even in the absence of
women being well represented, motivated deniers will perform the
mental gymnastics necessary to sustain the belief [using requisite
rationalizations; e.g., cognitively emphasizing that gender (or sex)
discrimination is, by law, illegal and so conclude that it is unlikely to
be happening in the workplace]. This ultimately suggests that for
those who are motivated, whether consciously or not, to deny that
gender discrimination is still an issue in their profession, awareness
raising interventions may be relatively ineffective. For motivated
deniers, other interventions may be necessary to mitigate their
potential expressions of bias (e.g., implementing systems and protocols
that minimize space for subjectivity in employee evaluations).
Together, the current research illustrates that even when issues
of women’s representation in a field have largely been resolved—even
when there is a wealth of women who have made it into the field’s
“pipeline,” with careers fully underway—gender biases can thrive.
Yet, this research also provides nuance to that point. Yes, it appears
that gender bias is still a problem, but not everyone is contributing
to it equally. There is instead a focal group of individuals who are
perpetuating this bias, and it is perhaps ironically those who think it
is not happening. Ultimately, this highlights an insidious paradox that
can arise when individuals misperceive the level of progress made
on gender equality in their profession such that those who mistakenly
think gender bias is no longer an issue become the highest risk for
perpetuating it. Thus, as other STEMM professions strive to establish
greater representations of women, it will be important that they
carefully consider what any change in representation signifies in terms
of progress for their field, what it does not signify, and what new
barriers to gender equality might surface in its wake.

SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE

Begeny et al., Sci. Adv. 2020; 6 : eaba7814

26 June 2020

Managers also indicated their endorsement of the belief that discrimination against women in the profession is no longer an issue
[adapted from (31): “Discrimination against women in the veterinary
profession is no longer a problem.” “In this profession, the careers of
female vets are still impacted by biases and discrimination toward
women” (reverse-scored); 1 (Strongly disagree) to 7 (Strongly agree);
r = 0.63,  = 0.77]. Higher scores indicated a stronger belief that
discrimination against women is no longer an issue. Managers randomly
assigned to the male (M = 4.15, SD = 1.58) versus female (M = 3.99,
SD = 1.46) target condition did not differ in their endorsement of
this belief, t252 = 0.81, P = 0.42.
Study 2 statistical analyses
We used an  level of 0.05 (two-tailed) for all statistical tests (no data
transformations; aside from mean centering). For preliminary analyses
(e.g., comparing managers by condition on demographic variables), we
used independent-samples t tests and chi-square tests as required. Results
expressed for descriptive purposes in United States Dollar (USD)
were based on the British Pound Sterling (GBP) conversion rate on
13 May 2018 (1.355), the median date of data collection within the
sample. Results expressed in terms of a pay gap (also for descriptive
purposes) were calculated following guidelines parallel to those for official
reporting of gender pay gaps in the United Kingdom (50) (mean gender
difference in pay [mean advised salary for male target − female target]/
mean pay for men [advised salary for male target] ×100). For primary
analyses, we used PROCESS (42) in SPSS to test moderation (model 1)
and moderated mediation (model 7), bootstrapped with mean centering
(covariates included managers’ age, gender, years of managerial experience, years since graduating from vet school, and current level of
involvement in performance reviews; follow-up analyses without
covariates evinced virtually identical results). Effect sizes computed in
PROCESS were converted using established equations (49). For
additional information, see the “Study 2 supplemental analyses”
section in the Supplementary Materials.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS

Supplementary material for this article is available at http://advances.sciencemag.org/cgi/
content/full/6/26/eaba7814/DC1

REFERENCES AND NOTES

1. NSF National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics, Women, Minorities, and
Persons with Disabilities in Science and Engineering (NSF National Center for Science and
Engineering Statistics, 2019); https://ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/nsf19304/digest.
2. U.S. Department of Labor, Women’s Bureau, Employment and Earnings by Occupation 2018
(U.S. Department of Labor, 2018); https://www.dol.gov/agencies/wb/data/occupations.
3. B. Murphy, These Medical Specialties Have the Biggest Gender Imbalances (American
Medical Association, 2019); https://ama-assn.org/residents-students/specialty-profiles/
these-medical-specialties-have-biggest-gender-imbalances.
4. A. J. Koch, S. D. D’Mello, P. R. Sackett, A meta-analysis of gender stereotypes and bias in experi­
mental simulations of employment decision making. J. Appl. Psychol. 100, 128–161 (2015).
5. C. A. Moss-Racusin, J. F. Dovidio, V. L. Brescoll, M. J. Graham, J. Handelsman, Science faculty’s
subtle gender biases favor male students. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 109, 16474–16479 (2012).
6. B. Welle, M. E. Heilman, Formal and Informal Discrimination Against Women at Work: The
Role of Gender Stereotypes (The Center for Public Leadership Working Papers 18, Harvard
Univ. Press, 2005).
7. S. E. Holleran, J. Whitehead, T. Schmader, M. R. Mehl, Talking shop and shooting
the breeze: A study of workplace conversation and job disengagement among STEM
faculty. Soc. Psychol. Personal. Sci. 2, 65–71 (2011).
8. N. DiTomaso, C. Post, D. R. Smith, G. F. Farris, R. Cordero, Effects of structural position
on allocation and evaluation decisions for scientists and engineers in industrial R&D.
Adm. Sci. Q. 52, 175–207 (2007).
9. S. Atir, M. J. Ferguson, How gender determines the way we speak about professionals.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 115, 7278–7283 (2018).

9 of 10

Downloaded from https://www.science.org on November 08, 2022

and/or gender pronouns used. For more information, see the “Study
2 experimental materials and supplemental measures” section in
the Supplementary Materials.
Consistent with previous research (5), multiple measures were
used to discern managers’ evaluation of the employee’s competence,
value, and worth: (i) general [Generally speaking, how competent
does Mark seem to be?; 1 (Not at all competent) to 7 (Very competent)],
(ii) colleague-based [adapted from (48): Within Mark’s practice,
among colleagues do you imagine he is: looked up to? admired? held
in high regard? seen as a role model for others in the practice?; 1 (No,
definitely not) to 7 (Yes, definitely);  = .92], (iii) advised salary [Considering Mark’s past performance, future potential, etc., if he was
employed in your practice, what salary do you think would be fitting
for him? Suggested salary: £ (open-ended numeric response); managers
also reported the typical salary in their practice for employees with
similar experience as Mark, and the typical salary was subtracted from
the advised salary; thus, any differences in base salary rates (which can
be substantial across different regions of the United Kingdom) were
accounted for by analyzing respondent-specific deviations in advised
salary; typical salary was assessed with: In your practice, what is the
typical salary for vets who are relatively new to the profession (e.g.,
graduated 1 to 2 years ago)? Typical salary: £ (open-ended numeric
response)], and (iv) pay raise {Some vets in Mark’s practice, though
certainly not all, get a 2% pay rise each year. If you were Mark’s
employer and he came to you and asked for a pay rise, based on his
performance, would you give him one? If so, what percentage would
you give him?; 1 [No pay rise at this time (0%)] to 7 (3.0%+)}. Higher
values on each measure indicated greater perceived competence/worth.
In addition to examining each measure independently, as in previous research (5), these measures were standardized and averaged
to form a more robust composite measure of competence, which
was used in subsequent analyses testing whether biased competence
evaluations translated into differential treatment (for analyses using
the general competence measure alone, see the “Study 2 supplemental
analyses” in the Supplementary Materials). Specifically, managers
indicated their likelihood of treating the vet (if s/he was in their own
practice) in ways that emerge from, and functionally convey, recognition of an individual’s distinct level of value and worth. This
included expressions of distinctive treatment [If Mark was employed
in your practice, along with several other vets, would you: let him
start taking on more supervisory/managerial responsibilities in the
practice? encourage Mark to take on tasks/responsibilities typically
reserved for vets at a slightly higher grade than his? let Mark represent
the practice at outside (industry/professional) events? advise other
vets in the practice to look to Mark as a valuable source of knowledge
and guidance? let him serve as a PDP mentor for more junior colleagues
(i.e., RCVS Professional Development Phase mentor)? give him the
opportunity to become more involved in managing the business/
financial side of the practice?; 1 (No, definitely not) to 7 (Yes,
definitely);  = .78] and encouragement to pursue a valuable promotion in the near future {In the next few months, if Mark expressed interest in becoming a principal, when would you advise
that he seek such a promotion? In other words, how soon do you
think Mark could be ready to take on this type of position?; 1 (I think
he could be ready to take on a principal position within the next
year) to 6 [I do not think he would be ready to take on a principal
position anytime in the foreseeable future (anytime in the next
6 years)], reverse-scored}. Higher values on each measure indicated
greater willingness to treat the vet in distinctly positive ways.

SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE

Begeny et al., Sci. Adv. 2020; 6 : eaba7814

26 June 2020

38. “Veterinary women: Past, present and future,” Veterinary Woman (2015); https://
veterinarywoman.co.uk/2015/02/veterinary-women-past-present-and-future/.
39. The Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons, RCVS Facts 2008: The Annual Report of the Royal
College of Veterinary Surgeons: Part 2 (The Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons, 2008),
pp. 1–23; https://rcvs.org.uk/news-and-views/publications/rcvs-facts-2008/.
40. F. Danbold, Y. J. Huo, Men’s defense of their prototypicality undermines the success
of women in STEM initiatives. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 72, 57–66 (2017).
41. J. F. Dovidio, S. L. Gaertner, Aversive racism and selection decisions: 1989 and 1999.
Psychol. Sci. 11, 315–319 (2000).
42. A. F. Hayes, Introduction to Mediation, Moderation, and Conditional Process Analysis:
A Regression-Based Approach (Guilford Press, 2013).
43. A. Waters, Gender pay gap exists across the profession. Vet. Rec. 182, 92–93 (2018).
44. J. T. Jost, M. R. Banaji, The role of stereotyping in system-justification and the production
of false consciousness. Br. J. Soc. Psychol. 33, 1–27 (1994).
45. C. S. Crandall, A. Eshleman, A justification-suppression model of the expression
and experience of prejudice. Psychol. Bull. 129, 414–446 (2003).
46. S. J. Ceci, W. M. Williams, S. M. Barnett, Women’s underrepresentation in science:
Sociocultural and biological considerations. Psychol. Bull. 135, 218–261 (2009).
47. C. T. Begeny, Y. J. Huo, Is it always good to feel valued? The psychological benefits
and costs of higher perceived status in one’s ethnic minority group. Group Process.
Intergroup Relat. 21, 193–213 (2018).
48. C. T. Begeny, Y. J. Huo, When identity hurts: How positive intragroup experiences can yield
negative mental health implications for ethnic and sexual minorities. Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 47,
803–817 (2017).
49. J. Cohen, Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences (L. Erlbaum Associates, 1988).
50. UK Gender Pay Gap Service, Gender Pay Gap Reporting: Make Your Calculations (UK
Gender Pay Gap Service, 2019); https://gov.uk/guidance/gender-pay-gap-reportingmake-your-calculations.
51. C. L. Hoyt, J. L. Burnette, Gender bias in leader evaluations: Merging implicit theories
and role congruity perspectives. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 39, 1306–1319 (2013).
52. UK Office for National Statistics, Top 100 Baby Names in England and Wales: Historical Data
(UK Office for National Statistics, 2014); https://www.ons.gov.uk/
peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/livebirths/datasets/
babynamesenglandandwalestop100babynameshistoricaldata.
53. G. Hodson, J. F. Dovidio, S. L. Gaertner, Processes in racial discrimination: Differential
weighting of conflicting information. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 28, 460–471 (2002).
54. P. Glick, S. T. Fiske, The ambivalent sexism inventory: Differentiating hostile
and benevolent sexism. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 70, 491–512 (1996).
55. M. K. Ryan, S. A. Haslam, M. D. Hersby, R. Bongiorno, Think crisis–think female: The glass
cliff and contextual variation in the think manager–think male stereotype. J. Appl. Psychol.
96, 470–484 (2011).
56. M. E. Heilman, Gender stereotypes and workplace bias. Res. Organ. Behav. 32, 113–135
(2012).
Acknowledgments: We thank R. Bongiorno, T. Morgenroth, and T. Kirby for providing input
on an earlier version of this article. We also thank S. Burnell, A. Findon, M. Knowles-Bacon, and
the BVA staff for their support in the recruitment and data collection process. This research
was approved by and carried out in compliance with standards for human research set forth
by the University of Exeter Psychology Ethics Committee. Informed consent was obtained
from participants. Funding: Financial support was provided by the European Research Council
(Consolidator Grant, ERC-CoG 725128, awarded to M.K.R.). The funders had no role in study
design, data collection, analysis, or manuscript preparation. Secondary funding was provided
by the BVA (BVA Vet Futures Project Grant, awarded to M.K.R.). G.R., affiliated with the BVA,
had a role in study design and data collection. G.R. had no role in data analysis or manuscript
preparation. Author contributions: C.T.B. and M.K.R. designed the studies with guidance from
G.R. G.R. led participant recruitment. C.T.B. analyzed the data with guidance from M.K.R. and
C.A.M.-R. C.T.B., M.K.R., and C.A.M.-R. wrote the manuscript. All authors approved the final
version of the manuscript. Competing interests: The authors declare that they have no
competing interests. Data and materials availability: Anonymous data corresponding to
study 1 and study 2 analyses are available from the Open Science Framework repository
(https://osf.io/wgme6/). Code used for primary analyses is available upon request from the
first author.
Submitted 8 January 2020
Accepted 12 May 2020
Published 26 June 2020
10.1126/sciadv.aba7814
Citation: C. T. Begeny, M. K. Ryan, C. A. Moss-Racusin, G. Ravetz, In some professions, women
have become well represented, yet gender bias persists—Perpetuated by those who think it is
not happening. Sci. Adv. 6, eaba7814 (2020).

10 of 10

Downloaded from https://www.science.org on November 08, 2022

10. R. Jagsi, K. A. Griffith, A. Stewart, D. Sambuco, R. De Castro, P. A. Ubel, Gender differences
in the salaries of physician researchers. JAMA 307, 2410–2417 (2012).
11. P. L. Carr, A. Raj, S. E. Kaplan, N. Terrin, J. L. Breeze, K. M. Freund, Gender differences
in academic medicine: Retention, rank, and leadership comparisons from the national
faculty survey. Acad. Med. J. Assoc. Am. Med. Coll. 93, 1694–1699 (2018).
12. R. van Veelen, B. Derks, M. D. Endedijk, Double trouble: How being outnumbered and negatively
stereotyped threatens career outcomes of women in STEM. Front. Psychol. 10, 150 (2019).
13. C. Seron, S. Silbey, E. Cech, B. Rubineau, “I am Not a Feminist, but. . .”: Hegemony
of a meritocratic ideology and the limits of critique among women in engineering.
Work Occup. 45, 131–167 (2018).
14. G. Huang, “Seeking women: 70+ companies that have set gender diversity targets,”
Forbes (2017); https://forbes.com/sites/georgenehuang/2017/02/14/seeking-women-40companies-that-have-set-gender-diversity-targets/.
15. C. W. Greider, J. M. Sheltzer, N. C. Cantalupo, W. B. Copeland, N. Dasgupta, N. Hopkins,
J. M. Jansen, L. Joshua-Tor, G. S. Mc Dowell, J. L. Metcalf, B. A. McLaughlin, A. Olivarius,
E. K. O’Shea, J. L. Raymond, D. Ruebain, J. A. Steitz, B. Stillman, S. M. Tilghman, V. Valian,
L. Villa-Komaroff, J. Y. Wong, Increasing gender diversity in the STEM research workforce.
Science 366, 692–695 (2019).
16. National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, Promising Practices for
Addressing the Underrepresentation of Women in Science, Engineering, and Medicine:
Opening Doors (The National Academies Press, 2020).
17. J. Huang, A. Krivkovich, I. Starikova, L. Yee, D. Zanoschi, Women in the Workplace 2019
(Mckinsey & Company, 2019); https://mckinsey.com/~/media/McKinsey/Featured%20
Insights/Gender%20Equality/Women%20in%20the%20Workplace%202019/
Women-in-the-workplace-2019.ashx.
18. R. M. Kanter, Some effects of proportions on group life, in The Gender Gap in
Psychotherapy: Social Realities and Psychological Processes, P. P. Rieker, E. Carmen, Eds.
(Springer US, 1984), pp. 53–78.
19. N. Ellemers, Gender stereotypes. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 69, 275–298 (2018).
20. C. L. Williams, The glass escalator: Hidden advantages for men in the “female” professions.
Soc. Probl. 39, 253–267 (1992).
21. C. L. Ridgeway, Interaction and the conservation of gender inequality: Considering
employment. Am. Sociol. Rev. 62, 218–235 (1997).
22. B. A. Nosek, M. R. Banaji, A. G. Greenwald, Harvesting implicit group attitudes and beliefs
from a demonstration web site. Group Dyn. Theory Res. Pract. 6, 101–115 (2002).
23. B. A. Nosek, M. R. Banaji, A. G. Greenwald, Math = male, me = female, therefore math ≠ me.
J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 83, 44–59 (2002).
24. F. L. Smyth, B. A. Nosek, On the gender–science stereotypes held by scientists: Explicit accord
with gender-ratios, implicit accord with scientific identity. Front. Psychol. 6, 415 (2015).
25. D. I. Miller, A. H. Eagly, M. C. Linn, Women’s representation in science predicts national
gender-science stereotypes: Evidence from 66 nations. J. Educ. Psychol. 107, 631–644 (2015).
26. K. L. Milkman, M. Akinola, D. Chugh, What happens before? A field experiment exploring
how pay and representation differentially shape bias on the pathway into organizations.
J. Appl. Psychol. 100, 1678–1712 (2015).
27. D. Z. Grunspan, S. L. Eddy, S. E. Brownell, B. L. Wiggins, A. J. Crowe, S. M. Goodreau, Males
under-estimate academic performance of their female peers in undergraduate biology
classrooms. PLOS ONE 11, e0148405 (2016).
28. U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Digest of
Education Statistics: Bachelor’s, Master’s, and Doctor’s Degrees Conferred by Postsecondary
Institutions, by Sex of Student and Discipline Division, 2016–2017 (U.S. Department of
Education, 2018); https://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d18/tables/dt18_318.30.asp.
29. UK Higher Education Statistics Agency, Higher Education Qualifications Obtained by
Subject Area and Sex 2012/13 to 2016/17 (UK Higher Education Statistics Agency, 2018);
https://hesa.ac.uk/data-and-analysis/sfr247/figure-18.
30. L. S. Wilton, D. T. Sanchez, M. M. Unzueta, C. Kaiser, N. Caluori, In good company: When
gender diversity boosts a company’s reputation. Psychol. Women Q. 43, 59–72 (2019).
31. J. K. Swim, K. J. Aikin, W. S. Hall, B. A. Hunter, Sexism and racism: Old-fashioned
and modern prejudices. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 68, 199–214 (1995).
32. J. K. Swim, L. L. Cohen, Overt, covert, and subtle sexism: A comparison between the attitudes
toward women and modern sexism scales. Psychol. Women Q. 21, 103–118 (1997).
33. E. L. Uhlmann, G. L. Cohen, “I think it, therefore it’s true”: Effects of self-perceived objectivity
on hiring discrimination. Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis. Process. 104, 207–223 (2007).
34. B. Monin, D. T. Miller, Moral credentials and the expression of prejudice. J. Pers. Soc.
Psychol. 81, 33–43 (2001).
35. I. Régner, C. Thinus-Blanc, A. Netter, T. Schmader, P. Huguet, Committees with implicit
biases promote fewer women when they do not believe gender bias exists.
Nat. Hum. Behav. 3, 1171–1179 (2019).
36. H. Kelly, “Google commits $150 million to diversity,” CNNMoney (2015); https://money.
cnn.com/2015/05/06/technology/google-diversity-plan/index.html.
37. The Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons, RCVS Facts 2017: Facts and Figures from the
Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons (The Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons, 2018),
pp. 1–26; https://rcvs.org.uk/news-and-views/publications/rcvs-facts-2017/.

In some professions, women have become well represented, yet gender bias
persists—Perpetuated by those who think it is not happening
C. T. BegenyM. K. RyanC. A. Moss-RacusinG. Ravetz

Sci. Adv., 6 (26), eaba7814. • DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.aba7814

View the article online
https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/sciadv.aba7814
Permissions
https://www.science.org/help/reprints-and-permissions

Downloaded from https://www.science.org on November 08, 2022

Use of this article is subject to the Terms of service
Science Advances (ISSN 2375-2548) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science. 1200 New York Avenue
NW, Washington, DC 20005. The title Science Advances is a registered trademark of AAAS.
Copyright © 2020 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim
to original U.S. Government Works. Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0 (CC BY).

