ii46

THEORY AND METHODS

A framework to analyse gender bias in epidemiological
research

Marı´a Teresa Ruiz-Cantero, Carmen Vives-Cases, Lucı´a Artazcoz, Ana Delgado, 
Maria del Mar
Garcı´a Calvente, Consuelo Miqueo, Isabel Montero, Rocı´o Ortiz, Elena Ronda, 
Isabel Ruiz, Carme
Valls

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
. . . . . . . . . . .

J Epidemiol Community Health2007;61(suppl II):ii46–ii53. doi: 
10.1136/jech.2007.062034


The design and analysis of research may cause systematic
gender dependent errors to be produced in results because of
gender insensitivity or androcentrism. Gender bias in research
could be defined as a systematically erroneous gender
dependent approach related to social construct, which
incorrectly regards women and men as similar/different. Most
gender bias can be found in the context of discovery
(development of hypotheses), but it has also been found in the
context   of justification (methodological process), which must be
improved. In fact, one of the main effects of gender bias in
research  is partial or incorrect knowledge in the results, which
are systematically different from the real values.This paper
discusses some forms of conceptual and methodological bias
that may affect women’s health. It proposes a framework to
analyse gender bias in the design and analysis of research
carried out on women’s and men’s health problems, and on
specific women’s health issues.Using examples, the framework
aims to show the different theoretical perspectives in a social or
clinical research context where forms of selection, measurement
and confounding bias are produced as a result of gender
insensitivity. Finally, this paper underlines the importance of re-
examining results so that they may be reinterpreted to produce
new gender based knowledge.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Breaking with prejudices and reconstructing the
object of research requires a different way of
seeing, in the light of which common-sense
knowledge is reconstructed as a form of bias.
Ann Oakley1

Gender bias is defined as the differential medical
treatment of men and women, the impact of which

different. In turn, this bias produces mistaken or
partial knowledge in the results, which are
systematically different from the real values.
Gender   bias may cause inequitable responses from
health services and discrimination against one sex
or the other.

Gender bias may occur at any stage during the
inferential process. Moreover, gender bias may
even be found in published results, often because
data are not always sex stratified. As a result,
research, health promotion and preventive/health-
care services and political agendas rarely mention
the processes that account for sex differences and
gender inequalities.

Most gender bias is to be found in the context of
discovery.3–5 The biased production of new knowl-
edge is indirectly evidenced by the lack of research
and scientific literature concerning some of the
significant issues related to women’s health, such
as gender violence, illegal abortion and occupa-
tional health. Not indicating the susceptibility of
women to certain diseases that are common in
both sexes is another gender bias of knowledge,
such as the false belief that more men suffer
chronic  obstructive  pulmonary  disease  than
women.6 7

Most of the research on gender bias is based on
the feminist empiricism, which argues that sexism
and androcentrism are forms of social bias that
may be corrected by adhering more strictly to the
existing  methodological  norms  of  scientific
inquiry. The aim of the feminist empiricism
epistemology is to remove blinders and bias in
order    to produce better accounts of the world.3–5
Meanwhile, the main consequence of gender bias
in research is the lack of valid results. Therefore,
this paper wishes to underline the need for
methodological rules to be correctly applied in
order     to eliminate gender bias from the develop-
ment of hypotheses and the interpretation stages


See end of article for

authors’ affiliations

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Correspondence to:

Maria Teresa Ruiz-Cantero,
A´rea de Medicina
Preventiva y Salud Pu´blica,

Departamento de Salud
Pu´blica, Universidad de

Alicante, Apdo 99, 03080-
Alicante, Spain; cantero@
ua.es

Accepted 3 August 2007

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

may be positive, negative or neutral.2 For research

purposes, it should be considered that research
design and analysis may lead to systematic errors
in the results because of gender insensitivity or
androcentrism (the practice of giving overriding
importance to male human beings or to the
masculine point of view on the world, its culture
and its history). Gender insensitivity or andro-
centrism are unfounded  forms of prejudice.
Consequently, gender bias in research could be
defined as a systematic erroneous gender depen-
dent approach related to social construct, which
erroneously regards women and men as similar/

of data so that more realistic results may be
obtained.3–5

Abbreviations:ACIGH, American Conference of
Governmental Industrial Hygienists; AOR, adjusted odds
ratios;  CE, clinical epidemiology; CI, confidence intervals;
D, differences; DSM,Diagnostic and statistical manual of
mental disorders; E, equality; EDNOS, eating disorders not
otherwise specified; IRS, information retrieval system; IPV,
intimate partner violence; MB, measurement bias; MeSH,
medical subject headings; OR, odds ratios; PTSD, post-
traumatic stress disorder; RCTs, randomised controlled
trials;  RR, relative risk; SB, selection bias; SE, social
epidemiology; TLVs, threshold limit values


Analysis of gender bias                                                         
ii47


The international basis of evidence for professional policies
and practices in health and gender research is limited and
conceptual misinterpretations are common.8 This paper dis-
cusses some forms of conceptual and methodological bias that
underlie research on women’s health and proposes a frame-
work for analysis. It also aims to show the importance of
training health researchers in the application of the gender
perspective (hypotheses and analysis of sex differences in social
roles, identities, status and ideologies: androcentrism and
patriarchy), in order to gain a better understanding of how
gender influences the research process as regards results on the
health of both sexes.

GENDER INSENSITIVITY IN THE MEDLINE/PUBMED

AND COCHRANE INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SYSTEM

The bibliography selection process for any medical research and
the gender perspective debate may be affected by androcentr-
ism in traditional science.9 This is also true for the documenta-
tion sciences that are responsible for the information retrieval
system (IRS). The logical basis of an IRS is the listing of
descriptors that are hierarchically codified and linked with
Boolean operators. Gender bias can be observed in the selection
of heading terms and entry terms or in their semantic
associations in the well known medical subject headings
(MeSH)

An androcentric bias is the lack of a term to specifically
index gender studies within the 17 000 MeSH index linked
words. Neither is gender bias included among the 186
epidemiological method descriptors. This fact is considered a
gender   bias as the MeSH database includes less frequently
used terms or unnecessary terms about other medical subjects.
For instance, since 1966 the descriptor parity has been used to
index studies about the women, birth rates and pregnancy.
Over the past 40 years, this descriptor has only retrieved 2223
records as a major term, even after studies on diseases in the
female population and during pregnancy have been added in
the past few years. Another example is ‘‘vaginismus,’’ which
was introduced in 2006 as a specific MeSH term under
‘‘Sexual and Gender Pathology’’ in the MeSH tree. However,
there are only 196 records of this term registered since 1966
and just 10 articles include this term in their title. Moreover, a
year after its inclusion, only five articles have been indexed by
vaginismus.

Many new and, in their semantic fields, infrequent terms
have been added to the methodological branches of the MeSH
tree over the past 10 years—for instance, dissents and disputes,
crossover studies, fetal research—the latter in 2003, which
today only has 496 records. However, gender bias transferred to
prejudice despite the fact that gender bias is included in the
title  of 179 articles and in the abstract of 346 articles, a total of
525 records. These 179 articles on gender were classified under
prejudice (84), gender identity (24), in both MeSH terms (36)
and five other descriptors were used for the rest.

Our previous bibliometric studies showed that gender studies
are divided among 10 different MeSH terms: prejudice,
feminism,  gender  identity,  interpersonal  relationships,
women’s health, sex disorders and gender disorders, sex
factors, sex differences and sex distributions.10 Our exhaustive
search strategy retrieved 6856 articles between 1982 and 2002.
Therefore, adding a generic term such as gender studies
semantically related to specific terms to the MeSH database
would  be useful in order to make a bibliographical search easier
by exploiting the term strategy. However, a series of options
could be considered, such as introducing gender studies as a
subheading or introducing gender bias as a specific MeSH term
under patriarchal effects in the methodological branch of the
MeSH tree.

A FRAMEWORK TO ANALYSE GENDER BIAS IN
RESEARCH ON WOMEN’S AND MEN’S HEALTH
PROBLEMS

Eight different theoretical and practical positions related to
research that include men and women are presented within a
framework (see fig 1) and are illustrated with examples or
cases in order to show the relation between epidemiological
bias and gender bias in a social or clinical context.

The relation between biological sex, gender as a social construct
and health is complex. Perhaps as a result, the likeness of diseases
and their determinants in natural and social history is
unquestionably accepted, when, in fact their similarities are few
(boxes   1 to 4 in fig 1). Furthermore, the existence of important
differences between sexes (boxes 5 to 8 in fig 1), as well as
between different groups of women and different groups of men
is  also accepted. These erroneous assumptions of equality or
differences between sexes, in the natural history, clinical course
and behaviour of diseases, may produce biased knowledge that
will condition discriminatory professional practice towards one
sex or the other in healthcare services,11 as well as in health
promotion and preventive services and political agendas.

INCORRECTLY ASSUMING EQUALITY BETWEEN
WOMEN AND MEN

One way in which health service delivery and research can
involve gender bias is by assuming that women’s and men’s
health situations and risks are similar, when in fact they are not.11

Incorrectly assuming equality between women and men
(E): measurement bias (MB) in social epidemiology (SE)
(box 1)

Example of familism bias

Extreme gender insensitivity in research involves ignoring sex
as an important social variable.12 The aggregate bias, also
known as the familism bias, frequently occurs in research on
informal care. Since the family is considered to be the smallest
unit  of analysis, it is individually given the attribute of caring
for the family unit, for instance, when it is said that ‘‘the family
cares for its children and elderly,’’ although, it is mainly the
woman who carries out such tasks. Furthermore, research does
not generally identify which family member carries out these
reproductive tasks.

An international review of literature on elderly cancer
patients and the consequences of their disease for their partners
and families identified 165 references,13 some of which
considered gender as a principal determinant of coping and
psychological wellbeing.

The results presented were related to differences by sex (that
is, differential effect of the social support received according to
the sex of the patient, more emotional stress in women carers
or the differences found in the use of external support),
however gender analysis was not included as a key issue in the
interpretation of the results. Therefore, the differing contribu-
tions  that women and men made within the family and the
different effects that caring for a cancer patient had on both
sexes were obscured by the terms family, relatives and family
members used in the review.13

Incorrectly assuming equality between women and men
(E): selection bias (SB) in social epidemiology (SE)

(box 2)

Example of under-representation of women in
research on chemical risks

Protecting the health of workers is the aim of occupational
chemical risk evaluations. However, a selection bias because of
gender insensitivity may influence the threshold limit values
(TLVs) of these risk evaluations, since no specific information is
available regarding chemical substances and women. The TLVs


ii48                                               Ruiz-Cantero, Vives-Cases, 
Artazcoz, et al

Figure 1The three-dimensional matrix in which epidemiological bias (selection 
or measurement), epidemiological context (clinical or social) and gender
bias (incorrectly assuming equality or differences between women and men) can 
be expected to influence the outcomes in a positive or negative way.


Analysis of gender bias                                                         
ii49


do not consider sex differences despite the obvious metabolic
differences between the sexes that may affect their reactions to
exposure. Consequently, the values given are the same for both
sexes in most countries as well as for the ACIGH (American
Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists).

This is the case of the non-sex specific chemical risk
evaluation in an occupation that is typical to women, hair-
dressing.14 15 In addition, the reference values are not applicable
as they focus on inhalation risks, and do not consider the risk of
cutaneously absorbed chemicals used in this occupation.
Moreover, these values have been set for specific chemicals
used in an 8-hour working day, but not for chemical
compounds that a hairdresser would usually use for working
days that last longer than 8 hours and where work is often
concentrated at the weekends and in shifts. Also, the different
responses from pregnant women workers have not been taken
into account in the setting of these limits.14 15

Incorrectly assuming equality between women and men
(E): selection bias (SB) in clinical epidemiology (CE)

(box 3)

Example of under-representation of women in clinical
trials

In relation to clinical epidemiology, sex differences in pharma-
cokinetics and pharmacodynamics are widely recognised.16 17
However, a classic gender selection bias in clinical research is
because women are poorly represented in the samples of
randomised controlled trials (RCTs).18–21 Women’s participation
in   RCTs is lower in the early phases of the studies in which
safety, a safe dosage range and side effects are determined.
Fleischet alreviewed the 2001 issues of three leading clinical
pharmacology journals publishing early phase drug trials. In all,
239  studies including 15 880 subjects were evaluated. Thirty-
one studies tested drugs with already published differences in
pharmacokinetics and adverse reactions, in only 9% (2/22) of
which had a gender specific analysis been performed. This
outlines the need for women’s inclusion at these early phases.19

Incorrectly assuming equality between women and men
(E): measurement bias (MB) in clinical epidemiology (CE)
(box 4)

Example of lack of sex stratified information in clinical
trials

The lack of sex stratification could produce erroneous measure-
ment and misleading results on the efficacy and effectiveness of
drugs used for women’s health. This is shown in systematic
review papers.22 Furthermore, these are the cases of RCT drug
therapy for myocardial infarction and rofecoxib.18 20 In order to
avoid partial knowledge on the efficacy and effectiveness of
drugs in women, the following steps have been proposed18:

N Sex distribution, which reflects the patient population likely
to receive the therapy

N Subgroup analysis of men and women to permit meta-
analyses

N Interaction analysis that enables differences between sexes
to be determined

N Discussions that include gender related contents to establish

the limits to which the results can be generalised to the
population outside the trial or to underline the differences in
responses by sex.

INCORRECTLY ASSUMING DIFFERENCES BETWEEN
WOMEN AND MEN

The second way in which gender bias may exist in health
service delivery and research is by assuming differences where
there are actually similarities.11

Incorrectly assuming differences between women and
men (D): selection bias (SB) in social epidemiology (SE)
(box 5)

Example of gender bias related to the selection of
women as subject of eating disorders studies

By analysing some recently published systematic reviews, it can
be seen that studies on eating disorders involve a selection bias,
as women and not men are explicitly included.23 24 Additionally,
the definition of the newDiagnostic and statistical manual of
mental disorders(DSM-IV) diagnostic category known as eating
disorders not otherwise specified (EDNOS) is based on the
assumption that such disorders can only be found in women,25
which  may thus affect the EDNOS prevalence.26

Incorrectly assuming differences between women and
men (D): measurement bias (MB) in social epidemiology
(SE) (box 6)

Examples of gender bias related to changes in DSM
diagnostic criteria

Different reasons such as biological vulnerability, different
coping styles, family history and personality traits27 among
others, have been argued to explain why post-traumatic stress
disorder (PTSD) may be more common in women than in men
(13% in females and 6.2% in males)28 when they are exposed to
adverse traumatic events. One fundamental question addressed
in the analyses of this sex related difference is whether
differential rates of PTSD could be the result of differential
exposure to events and not necessarily to differences in the
development of PTSD, since the diagnosis of PTSD is dependent
upon  the presence of an adverse (traumatic) event.

Consideration should be given to certain new types of
traumatic events not included in earlier questionnaires or
scales but contained in the DSM-IV, which encompass other
events beyond natural disasters, wars, torture or kidnapping.
Such is the case for rape, which is obviously far more common
in women than in men, as well as other forms of sexual abuse
and interpersonal violence, which are also more commonly
associated with PTSD when compared to accidents or natural
disasters.29 In fact, women are at a greater risk of PTSD than
men following exposure to rape (32% compared to 6% in
men).30 The overall risk of PTSD depends on the stressor
definition and the methods used to measure exposure to
specific types of traumatic events. There is consistent evidence
of sex differences in the distribution of exposure across specific
types of events, while different types of trauma carry different
risks for the development of PTSD. As such, much of the
increased prevalence of PTSD in women may be affected by
trauma type. However, the assumption that women are exposed
to fewer traumatic events than men is difficult to understand as
an important variation across ‘‘types of traumatic events’’ due
to information bias in the questionnaires does not inquire
about relevant risks for women.

Incorrectly assuming differences between women and
men (D): selection bias (SB) in clinical epidemiology (CE)
(box 7)

Example of gender bias in ferritin reference values
The assumption that it is normal to find lower values for certain
clinical parameters in women than in men may constitutes a
gender bias that should be addressed by medicine in order to
adapt the normal value or reference limits to clinical
parameters of health related quality of life.31 32 That menstruat-
ing women have up to one million red blood cells fewer than a
man has been accepted as ‘‘natural’’ because of their monthly
blood loss. It may be true that women are different from men in
general but there may still be many women with undetected
deficiencies.


ii50                                               Ruiz-Cantero, Vives-Cases, 
Artazcoz, et al

Table 1Reference values of ferritin in public and private health centres in 
Spain


Public and private health centres

Reference values

(ng/ml)    Women   Men

Clinical Laboratory, Cornella´-Barcelona, Catalonia        30–300

Basurto Hospital, Vasco Country                15–150

Laboratory Echevarne, Granada, Andalusia           10–204

San Juan de Dios Hospital, Barcelona, Catalonia         10–120

La Plana Hospital, Vila-Real Valencian Community         5–150      5–150   
20–200

Unilabs, Barcelona, Catalonia                         5–140   29–280

Hermanos Miralles Primary Care Centre, Madrid                 14–150   40–340

Folguera Laboratory, Barcelona, Catalonia                    15–150   30–400

Fornells, Olo´, Crespo Laboratory, Barcelona, Catalonia              20–200   
20–450


Based on research results, the ranges of ‘‘normal values’’
have changed in the past few years, which is reflected in the
main internal medicine books. However, many laboratories use
the euphemism ‘‘reference values,’’ which depend on the
population attended by the centre, instead of referring to
‘‘normal values.’’ This denomination is confusing for health
professionals who are required to interpret these reference
values   as they may be mistaken for normal values.33 34 Once
again, gender bias may also be the result of dispersed results of
certain clinical parameters. An example of this is the wide
dispersion of normal values for parameters related to bone
marrow iron stores.35 Although the normal accepted value for
the indicator of the iron storage protein ferritin is 50–200 ng/
ml, it is surprising to observe the dispersion of the reference
values used by different clinical analysis laboratories (table 1),
with higher values in men than in women.

Incorrectly assuming differences between women and
men (D): measurement bias (MB) in clinical

epidemiology (CE) (box 8)

Example of gender bias measuring the delay between
the onset of symptoms and obtaining treatment
Gender bias has been proved to be related to the inequitable
access, use and quality of healthcare services in men and

women with equal needs. Some studies on cardiology therapy
and on the management of patients with chest pain, acute
myocardial infarction or unstable angina measure sex differ-
ences  by the time that passes between the onset of symptoms

Table 2Multivariate odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence
intervals (CI) for the associations between self perceived
health status and independent variables (Catalonia Health
Survey, 1994)

OR (95% CI)

Sex

Men                1

Women              1.67 (1.37 to 2.03)

Occupational social class

Non-manual             1

Manual               2.00 (1.66 to 2.42)

Household size

Two                1

Three               1.08 (0.75 to 1.55)

Four                1.39 (0.98 to 1.96)

.Four               1.58 (1.08 to 2.31)

Living with children under 15

No                 1

Yes                0.96 (0.75 to 1.23)

Living with people older than 65

No                 1

Yes                0.72 (0.53 to 0.98)

Odds ratios are also adjusted for age.

and the hospital management, evaluation and therapy of the
patient, and also indicate the influence of gender on this
time.36–38 For women, the overall delay in electrocardiogram
time  is explained by delays experienced by women with non-
cardiac chest pain.36 Furthermore, the higher hospital case
fatality rate due to myocardial infarction in women has been
related to a longer delay in reaching the hospital emergency
room than men, particularly because of the role as carers of the
women.39 Moreover, the impact on the pre-hospital delay time
interval has been related to gender differences in reported
symptoms for acute myocardial infarction.38  Most of the
explanations given state that women are responsible for the
delay between the onset of symptoms and their arrival at the
hospital. However, the reasons for the occasional delay in
healthcare assistance given to women compared to men with
the  same needs remain unclear and support the claim that a
professional gender bias may exist.40 The IBERICA study on
myocardial infarction in Spain, for example, also shows women
experience longer delays from the onset of symptoms to
management at hospital (120 minutes for men, 153 minutes
for women).39

To prevent a possible information bias that may hamper
discovering the cause behind the delay between the onset of
symptoms and management at the healthcare centre, two
different times should be measured: (1) the time lapse between
the onset of symptoms and the request for health assistance
that depends on the woman and her environment, and (2) the
time lapse between the request for assistance and management
that depends on the health professionals.

GENDER BIAS IN THE ANALYSIS OF THE RESULTS

In epidemiological research, certain factors are ignored repeat-
edly. For example, it can be said that exposure to work burden
does not occur equally in men and women. In women with
children, the number of hours in the workplace does not
represent the total work burden to anywhere near the same
extent  as it would for men. Women in this situation do not rest
and recuperate when they are not at work. On the contrary, for
some the workplace is a relatively restful location. Also, the
healthy worker effect is different in men and women: women
are more strongly health selected into paid employment than
men. Furthermore, the occupation given at the time of a census
or survey will often not have occupied as many person years of
a woman’s life as it would for a man of the same age.

When insufficient information is provided in a report to
determine the potentially different effects and contributions
that sex may have on the research topic, a drastic review of the
research design and analysis is needed. Sex is frequently treated
in public health as a potentially confounding variable, the
effects of which, if any, are controlled statistically and then
ignored. Accordingly, data should be carefully checked to
identify gender differences in health.41


Analysis of gender bias                                                         
ii51

Table 3Multivariate odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for the 
associations
between self perceived health status and the independent variables by sex 
(Catalonia Health
Survey, 1994)

OR (95% CI)

Men            Women

Occupational social class

Non-manual               1              1

Manual                  1.95 (1.53 to 2.48)      2.07 (1.53 to 2.80)

Household size

Two                   1              1

Three                  0.98 (0.62 to 1.57)      1.24 (0.70 to 2.19)

Four                   1.23 (0.79 to 1.92)      1.62 (0.93 to 2.82)

.Four                  1.13 (0.68 to 1.87)      2.48 (1.38 to 4.46)

Living with children under 15

No                   1              1

Yes                   1.08 (0.79 to 1.49)      0.83 (0.57 to 1.23)

Living with people older than 65

No                   1              1

Yes                   0.82 (0.56 to 1.21)      0.60 (0.36 to 0.98)

Odds ratios are also adjusted for age.


Furthermore, interactions between traditional gender roles
and emerging situations may influence current trends in gender
differences as regards health related behaviours and their
impact  on health status.42 The gender perspective must there-
fore be applied to the knowledge produced on the sex division
of reproductive (domestic and caring) and productive work and
its impact on health.

In 2001, a study was conducted on workers aged 25–64 who
were married or cohabiting (2148 men and 1185 women) to
examine the association between family demands and six
health indicators.43 The data were taken from the 1994
Catalonian Health Survey (CHS), a cross-sectional survey based
on    a representative sample of the non-institutionalised popula-
tion of Catalonia, a region in north eastern Spain with
approximately six million inhabitants. Family demands were
measured through three variables: household size, living with
children under 15 and living with people older than 65.
Multiple logistic regression models and adjusted odds ratios
(AOR) were fitted and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were
calculated.

Tables 2–4 illustrate why it is important that statistical
analyses consider the potential interaction of gender and social
class when examining variables associated with self perceived
health status. In table 2, sex and occupational social class are
introduced as adjusting variables, thereby assuming that the

impact of family demands on health is similar for men and
women and does not differ by social class. According to these
results, the likelihood of reporting a poor self perceived health
status increases with household size, whereas living with
people older than 65 seems to be protective, regardless of sex
and social class.

However, in table 3, the analysis has been stratified by sex
and the results change dramatically. Household size and living
with people aged over 65 can be seen to be associated only with
women’s health. Taking into account that women are still
mainly responsible for domestic tasks, even when they are
employed, these results seem to adjust better to the theoretical
framework.

Resources for dealing with domestic work should be taken
into account. It has been reported that hiring a person to do
domestic tasks is associated with good self perceived health
status among married female workers after adjusting for age
and social class. No such association was found among married
male workers. In fact, when the analysis is additionally
stratified by social class, the impact of family demands, both
as regards household size and living with people aged over 65,
is limited to women from manual social classes (table 4). Once
again, these results are more coherent with the theory. Women
belonging to non-manual social classes have more resources for
coping with domestic work. High income enables them to pay

Table 4Multivariate odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for the 
associations between self perceived health status
and independent variables by sex and occupational social class (Catalonia 
Health Survey, 1994)

Men                          Women

Non-manual       Manual            Non-manual       Manual

Household size

Two              1            1               1             1

Three              1.13 (0.54 to 2.37)     0.91 (0.49 to 1.69)        1.64 
(0.71 to 3.74)     0.98 (0.44 to 2.15)

Four              1.47 (0.74 to 2.91)     1.10 (0.60 to 2.00)        1.36 (0.60 
to 3.08)     1.80 (0.83 to 3.89)

.Four             1.63 (0.74 to 3.59)     0.91 (0.46 to 1.77)       2.16 (0.90 
to 5.21)     2.74 (1.22 to 6.17)

Living with children under 15

No              1            1               1             1

Yes               0.77 (0.46 to 1.28)     1.37 (0.91 to 2.07)        0.66 (0.37 
to 1.20)     1.05 (0.62 to 1.78)

Living with people older
than 65

No              1            1               1             1

Yes               0.88 (0.48 to 1.62)     0.77 (0.47 to 1.26)        1.15 (0.57 
to 2.32)     0.33 (0.16 to 0.66)

Odds ratios are also adjusted for age.


ii52                                               Ruiz-Cantero, Vives-Cases, 
Artazcoz, et al


for help with domestic tasks and childcare and relieves them of
some of the overload. Some female manual workers may be
helped with domestic tasks by elderly people living at home.

The epidemiological analysis of the interactions of being
employed, domestic work, gender and social class is not easy. It
has been pointed out that the use of interaction terms in
regression models is as adequate as stratified analysis and has
the advantage of preserving parsimony. However, although this
position can be defended on statistical grounds, an important
part of the theoretical richness and intuitive interpretation is
lost. Moreover, given the gendered nature of almost all aspects
of social life, many interaction terms (some of which have more
than two variables) are required in statistical models; thus
making it difficult to interpret results.44

EPIDEMIOLOGICAL GENDER BIAS IN SPECIFIC
WOMEN’S HEALTH PROBLEMS

Examples of bias in research on violence against women
From a gender perspective, many health problems are
manifestations of the asymmetrical relations of power (inequal-
ity   and dominance) between men and women. This applies to
intimate partner violence (IPV) against women. Because of this,
the Ethics Code for Violence Research advises that women
should not be exposed to risk situations even if bias is produced
in research.

A selection bias was found in a cross-sectional study carried
out in 23 primary health centres in Spain, which quantified IPV
prevalence and measured its physical and psychological impact
on health.45 The sample included 1402 randomly selected adult
women attending such centres. Among the variables collected
through a self administered questionnaire were the existence of
physical, emotional or sexual abuse, and its timing, duration
and frequency. A systematic error may have been produced, as
one of the exclusion criteria was to be a woman accompanied
by her partner. Consequently, the prevalence of IPV will be
lower than the true prevalence as some of the excluded women
could actually be suffering IPV.

In the IPV prevalence surveys, the way in which the
information was obtained and its relation to the participation
rate of battered women is critical. The low participation rate of
battered women in household surveys may be the result of
information bias, since these women tend to refuse to
participate if their partner is at home in another room, or
when their partner would also be interviewed. The fear of
consequences of revealing their situation or the possibility of
being accompanied by their partner seems to influence women
in their decision not to take part in surveys. The IPV prevalence
for 135 women interviewed in a street intercept survey was
compared with that of a subsample of women willing to
participate in a household survey. The results showed that the
prevalence estimates of moderate to high IPV would be
underestimated by 8% in comparison with prevalence estimates
for a street intercept survey.46

The typologies of the alleged adult aggressors include those
who in their childhood: (1) experienced violence from
domineering parents (patriarchy), (2) witnessed and learned
violent behaviour from father against mother (or vice versa)
and/or against sister (sexism), and (3) neither witnessed nor
experienced violence. Based on these typologies, substantial
differences are found in the explicative model that relates
witnessing and experiencing violence in childhood (risk factor)
to exerting violence as an adult (outcome). The conflict tactics
scale is the most frequently used methodological tool in
measuring violent childhood experiences in men as an exposure
factor, and considers witnessed or experienced violence in
childhood together.47 In order to avoid misclassification bias in
research on the association between being a perpetrator of IPV

and having witnessed or experienced violence in childhood, the
multicausal context must be taken into account.48 Accordingly,
depending on the standpoint, ‘‘experiencing’’ and/or ‘‘witnes-
sing’’ violence will be asked in separate questions or in the
same one.

Example of identity gender bias in research including
housewives

Gender ideology has historically underestimated or distorted
the importance of the multiple contributions women have
made to social production. Gender ideology can be understood
as beliefs or attitudes that a person holds about gender roles:
people with an egalitarian gender ideology emphasise equality
and independence between men and women, while people with
a more traditional gender ideology emphasise the domestic and
reproductive roles of women and the productive role of men.
This   fact may have contributed to the existing information gap
on the interaction of reproductive and productive work and its
consequences on women’s health.

The following case involves a study on the effects of exposure
to pesticides on reproduction and illustrates how gender
stereotypes may influence a biased perception of risk, making
it necessary to re-analyse the information in order to identify
the risks existing in women population groups that had not
initially been classified as risk groups.49

When working women were compared to housewives to
evaluate the effects on reproduction, worse results were
observed in the housewives: low birth weight relative risk
(RR) = 1.2 (1.1 to 1.3) and preterm delivery RR = 1.2 (1.1 to
1.4).50 The possible reasons for these results are a healthy
worker selection bias, differences in access to medical care
during pregnancy and differences in other risk factors that
could aggravate the situation. However, another explanation
could be misclassification bias. Housewives could sometimes be
classified as unexposed to a risk when in fact they were
exposed. For instance, the great risk of fetal mortality in
children of agricultural workers exposed to pesticides was
RR = 1.62 (1.01 to 2.60). However, when this RR was stratified
by the occupational status of the wives of agricultural workers
exposed to pesticides (housewives vs employed women), it was
higher for housewives, RR = 1.68 (1.03 to 2.73), and lower for
employed women, RR = 1.24 (0.38 to 4.02).51 These results may
be due to indirect exposure (washing laundry, longer time
spent at home, etc) or to the fact that the housewives may have
helped their partners apply the pesticides.

CONCLUSIONS

This paper has presented a framework to show how systematic
errors involving gender influence research findings. This
framework has a limited structure and has been elaborated to
stimulate debate in the complex area of gender and health
research. Conceptual and methodological gender bias produces
partial and/or invalid knowledge that affects women’s health.
Gender bias is related to a general social construct, to the way
researchers conceive a study, to the accuracy of results and to
how these results are used to inform healthcare policy makers,
as well as health care, preventive and health promotion

services.

Identifying an objective and measurable bias in the manage-
ment of health problems is an important aim of those
researchers working in evidence based medicine and public
health. Based on their experience, medical and public health
professionals may be able to provide helpful hypotheses related
to  forms of gender bias that may occur in clinical and social
research on health problems that affect both sexes or on
specific women’s health issues.


Analysis of gender bias                                                         
ii53


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We thank Cristina Domingo (Barcelona), Pilar Rallo (Ja´en), Vita
Arrufat (Valencia), Enriqueta Barranco (Granada) and Vicente
Clemente Go´mez (Alicante).

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Authors’ affiliations

Marı´a Teresa Ruiz-Cantero, Carmen Vives-Cases, Lucı´a Artazcoz, Maria

del Mar Garcı´a Calvente, Isabel Montero, Isabel Ruiz, Carme Valls,Red
de Investigacio´n en salud y Ge´nero, Ministerio de Sanidad y Consumo,
Spain

Marı´a Teresa Ruiz-Cantero, Carmen Vives-Cases, Rocı´o Ortiz, Elena
Ronda,Medicina Preventiva y Salud Pu´blica, Universidad de Alicante,
Spain

Lucı´a Artazcoz,Agencia de Salud Pu´blica de Barcelona, Spain

Ana Delgado, Maria del Mar Garcı´a Calvente,Escuela Andaluza de
Salud Pu´blica, Granada, Spain

Consuelo Miqueo,Departamento de Ciencias Documentacio´n e Historia de
la Ciencia, Universidad de Zaragoza, Spain

Isabel Montero,Departamento de Medicina, Universidad de Valencia,
Spain

Carme Valls,Centro de Ana´lisis y Planificacio´n Sanitaria, Barcelona,
Spain

Marı´a Teresa Ruiz-Cantero, Carmen Vives-Cases, Lucı´a Artazcoz,

CIBERESP, Spain

Funding:This work has been financed by the Spanish Research Network on
Health and Gender (RISG).

REFERENCES

1Oakley A.Experiments in knowing. Gender and method in the social sciences.

Cambridge: Polity Press, 2000.

2Lenhart Sh. Gender discrimination: A health and career development problem
for women physicians.J Am Med Women Assoc1993;48:155–9.

3Harding S.The science question in feminism. New York: Cornell University Press,
Ithaca, 1993.

4Harding S.Feminism and methodology: social science issues. Bloomington, IN:
Indiana University Press, 1987.

5Harding S.Whose science, whose knowledge?New York: Cornell University
Press Ithaca, 1991.

6Chapman KR, Tashkin D, Pye DJ. Gender bias in the diagnosis of COPD.Chest
2001;119:1691–5.

7Miravitlles M, de la Roza C, Naberan K,et al.Attitudes toward the diagnosis of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in primary care.Arch Bronconeumol
2006;42:3–8.

8Doyal L. Sex and gender: the challenges for epidemiologists.Int J Health Serv

2003;33:569–79.

9Miqueo C. Women and doctors in medicine.Lancet1999;354:65.

10Miqueo C, Barral MJ, Fernandez T,et al.Progresividad del proyecto ge´nero en
salud. Ana´lisis bibliome´trico de la literatura internacional: 1982–2002. In: 
Pe´rez
Seden˜o E, ed.Ciencia, tecnologı´a y ge´nero en Iberoamerica. Madrid: CSIC,
2006.

11Ruiz MT, Verbrugge L. A two way view of gender bias in medicine. J Epidemiol
Comm Health, 1997;51:106–9.

12Eichler M.Non-sexist research methods. A practical guide. New York:
Routledge, 1991.

13Kotkamp-Mothes N, Slawinsky D, Hinderman S,et al.Coping and psychological
well being in families of elderly cancer patients.Crit Rev Oncol Hematol
2005;55:213–29.

14Van der Wal JF, Hoogeveen AW, Moons AMM,et al.Investigation on the
exposure of hairdressers to chemical agents.Environ Int1997;23:433–9.

15Labreche F, Forest J, Trottier M,et al.Characterization of chemical exposures 
in
hairdressing salons.Appl Occup Environ Hyg2003;18:1014–21.

16Gandhi M, Aweeka F, Greenblatt R,et al.Sex differences pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics.Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol2004;44:499–523.

17European Medicines Agency.Gender considerations in the conduct of clinical
trials(EMEA/CHMP/3916/2005). http://www.emea.eu.int/pdfs/human/ich/
391605en.pdf (accessed 9 July 2007).

18Rochon PA, Clark JP, Binns MA,et al.Reporting of gender-related information in
clinical trials of drug therapy for myocardial infarction.CMAJ1998;159:321–7.

19Fleish J, Fleish M, Thu¨rmann P. Women in early-phase clinical drug trials. 
Have
things changed over the past 20 years?Clin Pharmacol Ther2005;78:445–52.
20Cascales S, Ruiz Cantero MT, Pardo MA. Clinical trials with rofecoxib: 
analysis

of the information from the gender perspective.Med Clin (Barc)

2003;120:207–12.

21Ruiz Cantero MT, Pardo MA. European Medicines Agency policies for clinical
trials leave women unprotected.J Epidemiol Comm Health2006;60:911–3.

22Vidaver RM, LaFleur B, Tong C,et al.Women subjects in NHI-funded clinical
research literature: lack of progress in both representation and analysis by 
sex.
J Womens Health Gend Based Med2000;9:495–504.

23Hoek HW, Van Hoeken D. Review of the prevalence and incidence of eating
disorders.Int J Eat Disord2003;34:383–96.

24Pela´ez-Ferna´ndez MA, Labrador-Encinas FJ, Raich-Escursell RM. Epidemiologı´a
de los trastornos de la conducta alimentaria en Espan˜a: revisio´n y estado de 
la
cuestio´n.C Med Psicosom2004;71–72:33–41.

25American Psychiatric Association.Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental
disorders. Washington: APA, 1994.

26Machado PP, Machado BC, Goncalvez S,et al.The prevalence of eating
disorders not otherwise specified.Int J Eat Disord2007;40:212–21.

27Hembree EA, Foa EB. Post-traumatic stress disorder: psychological factors and
psychosocial interventions.J Clin Psychiatry2000;61(suppl 7):33–99.

28Breslau N, Davis GC, Andreski P,et al.Sex differences in post-traumatic stress
disorder.Arch Gen Psychiatry1997;54:1044–8.

29Mechanic MB. Beyond PTSD: mental health consequences of violence against
women.J Interpers Violence2004;19:1283–9.

30Norris FH. Epidemiology of trauma: frequency and impact of different 
potentially
traumatic events on different demographic groups.J Consult Clin Psychol
1992;60:409–18.

31Hastka J, Laserre JJ, Schwarzbeck A,et al.Laboratory tests of iron status:
correlation or common sense?Clin Chem1996;42:657.

32Rushton DH, Dover R, Sainsbury AW,et al.Iron deficiency is neglected in
women’s health.BMJ2002;325:1176.

33Naghii MR, Fouladi AI. Correct assessment of iron depletion and iron 
deficiency
anemia.Nutr Health2006;18:133–9.

34Hillman RS, Finch CA.Red cell manual. Philadelphia: Davis, 1996.
35Kasper DL, Braunwald E, Fauci A,et al. Harrison’s principles of internal

medicine. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2004.

36Takakuwa KM, Shofer FS, Hollander JE. The influence of race and gender on
time to initial electrocardiogram for patients with chest pain.Acad Emerg Med
2006;13:867–72.

37Rosenfeld AG, Lindauer A, Darney BG. Understanding treatment-seeking delay
in women with acute myocardial infarction: descriptions of decision-making
patterns.Am J Crit Care2005;14:285–93.

38Meischke H, Larsen MP, Eisenberg MS. Gender differences in reported symptoms
for acute myocardial infarction: impact on prehospital delay time interval.

Am J Emerg Med1998;16:363–6.

39Segura A, Zurriaga O, Rohlfs I,et al.Diferencias por ge´nero en las
caracterı´sticas, manejo y letalidad-complicaciones en pacientes con infarto
agudo   de miocardio (IAM): Estudio IBERICA.Gac Sanit2002;16(Suppl 1):90.

40Ruiz MT, Ronda E, Gil VF,et al.Atencio´n segu´n el ge´nero del paciente en los
servicios de urgencias: ¿diferente o desigual?Gac Sanit1995;9:76–83.

41Stephenson P, McKee M. Look twice.Eur J Publ Health1993;3:151–2.
42Annandale E, Hunt K.Gender inequalities in health. Buckingham: Open

University Press, 2000.

43Artazcoz L, Borrell C, Benach J. Gender inequalities in health among workers:
the relation with family demands.J Epidemiol Comm Health2001;55:639–47.
44Kunkel SR, Atchely RC. Why gender matters: being female is not the same as 
not

being male.Am J Prev Med1996;12:294–6.

45Ruiz-Perez I, Plazaola-Castan˜o J, Blanco-Prieto P,et al.Intimate partner
violence. A survey conducted in the primary care setting.Gac Sanit
2006;20:202–8.

46Waltermaurer E, Ortega C, McNutt L. Issues in estimating the prevalence of
intimate partner violence. Assessing the impact of abuse status on participation
bias.J Interpers Violence2003;18:959–74.

47Strauss MA, Hamby SL, Boney-McCoy S,et al.The revised conflict tactics scales
(CTS2). Development and preliminary psychometric data.J Fam Issues
1996;17:283–316.

48Heise L. Violence against women. An integrated, ecological framework.Violence
Against Women1998;4:262–90.

49Murphy JF, Dauncey M, Newcombe R. Employment in pregnancy: prevalence,
maternal characteristics, perinatal outcome.Lancet1984;26:1163–6.

50Regidor E, Ronda E, Garcı´a AM,et al.Paternal exposure to agriculture 
pesticides
and cause specific of foetal death.J Occup Environ Med2004;61:334–9.

51Ronda E, Regidor E, Garcı´a AM,et al.Association between congenital
anomalies and paternal exposure to agriculture pesticides depending on
mother’s employment status.J Occup Environ Med2005;47:826–8.

