ARTICLE

A “Scientific Diversity” Intervention to
Reduce Gender Bias in a Sample of Life
Scientists

Corinne A. Moss-Racusin,*† Jojanneke van der Toorn,‡ John F. Dovidio,§
Victoria L. Brescoll,∥ Mark J. Graham,¶ and Jo Handelsman#

†Department of Psychology, Skidmore College, Saratoga Springs, NY 12866; 
‡Department of
Psychology, Leiden University, 2333 AK Leiden, The Netherlands; §Department of 
Psychology,

‖School of Management, ¶Center for Teaching and Learning, and #Department of 
Molecular,
Cellular and Developmental Biology, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520

ABSTRACT

Mounting experimental evidence suggests that subtle gender biases favoring men 
contrib-
ute to the underrepresentation of women in science, technology, engineering, 
and math-
ematics (STEM), including many subfields of the life sciences. However, there 
are relatively
few evaluations of diversity interventions designed to reduce gender biases 
within the STEM
community. Because gender biases distort the meritocratic evaluation and 
advancement of
students, interventions targeting instructors’ biases are particularly needed. 
We evaluated
one such intervention, a workshop called “Scientific Diversity” that was 
consistent with an
established framework guiding the development of diversity interventions 
designed to re-
duce biases and was administered to a sample of life science instructors (N = 
126) at several
sessions of the National Academies Summer Institute for Undergraduate Education 
held
nationwide. Evidence emerged indicating the efficacy of the “Scientific 
Diversity” work-
shop, such that participants were more aware of gender bias, expressed less 
gender bias,
and were more willing to engage in actions to reduce gender bias 2 weeks after 
participat-
ing in the intervention compared with 2 weeks before the intervention. 
Implications for
diversity interventions aimed at reducing gender bias and broadening the 
participation of
women in the life sciences are discussed.


At the 2015 World Conference of Science Journalists, biochemist and Nobel laure-
ate Tim Hunt delivered controversial remarks suggesting that the inclusion of
women in science labs may undermine scientific productivity (Thomason, 2015).
After many colleagues critiqued these remarks as inappropriate and undermining
women’s advancement (Nature, 2015), Hunt was asked to resign from several pro-
fessional positions, including an honorary professorship (Bever, 2015). And yet,
his remarks highlight the continued prevalence of subtle gender biases in 
science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). Indeed, many have called for
the implementation of validated diversity interventions designed to educate sci-
ence faculty and reduce pernicious gender biases (Al-Gazali et al., 2013;
Moss-Racusin et al., 2014; Nature, 2015). However, relatively few validated 
inter-
ventions targeting gender bias are available for use in the STEM community
(Moss-Racusin et al., 2014). Although some recent studies suggest that existing
interventions can reduce gender bias (Jackson et al., 2014; Carnes et al., 
2015),
relatively little empirical research has assessed the effectiveness of existing 
STEM
gender bias interventions. The current work addresses this gap by examining life
science instructors’ responses to an evidence-based intervention designed to 
target
subtle gender bias.

Kenneth Gibbs, Monitoring Editor

Submitted September 5, 2015; Revised November

12, 2015; Accepted November 12, 2015

CBE Life Sci Educ September 1, 2016 15:ar29
DOI:10.1187/cbe.15-09-0187

*Address correspondence to: Corinne A.
Moss-Racusin (cmossrac@skidmore.edu).

© 2016 C. A. Moss-Racusin et al. CBE—Life
Sciences Education © 2016 The American Society
for Cell Biology. This article is distributed by The
American Society for Cell Biology under license
from  the author(s). It is available to the public
under an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share
Alike 3.0 Unported Creative Commons License
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/

by-nc-sa/3.0).

“ASCB®” and “The American Society for Cell
Biology®” are registered trademarks of The
American Society for Cell Biology.


C. A. Moss-Racusin et al.


GENDER BIAS IN ACADEMIC SCIENCE

Women’s participation in the life sciences has increased over
recent decades, particularly relative to other STEM fields. For
example, women earned 52% of doctoral degrees in the life
sciences in 2012, up from 37% in 1993; in comparison,
women earned just 20% of doctoral degrees in physics in
2012, up slightly from 13% in 1993 (National Science Foun-
dation [NSF], 2012). And yet, female life scientists remain
underrepresented among senior faculty, grantees, and award
winners.  For example, as of 2006, women comprised only
26% of full professors in the life sciences (NSF, 2008) and
constituted only 5% of Nobel laureates in physiology or med-
icine (Nobel Foundation, 2015). Additionally, female under-
graduate life science students appear to be underrepresented
in large-classroom discussions; although they comprise ~60%
of students enrolled in large biology classes, one study found
that their voices reflect fewer than 40% of responses to
instructor questions, a critical method of engaging with and
mastering course material (Eddy et al., 2014). To the extent
that women’s restricted involvement undermines access to
talent and slows scientific progress, the scientific community
stands to benefit from boosting women’s participation in the
life sciences and other STEM fields.

Researchers have sought to identify factors responsible

for the lingering underrepresentation of women in academic
science. For example, some evidence suggests that early sex
differences in attitudes toward and interest in STEM fields
(such that boys are more likely than girls to express positive
attitudes and interest in STEM) may contribute to the gen-
der disparity, though these attitudes are likely associated
with socialization processes communicating that STEM is
more appropriate for boys and men (vs. girls and women;
Ceci et al., 2014). Additionally, women’s participation may
be undermined by a lack of female role models (Dasgupta,
2011; Stout et al., 2011) and peers (Dasgupta et al., 2015).
In addition to these factors, mounting evidence suggests that
persistent gender biases favoring men may undermine women’s
progress in STEM. For example, across cultures and develop-
mental stages, children are more likely to produce images of
men than women when asked to draw a scientist (Finson et al.,
1995). Similarly, adults are more likely to associate science
with men than with women (Nosek et al., 2002). Finally, jour-
nal articles with female authors are less likely to be cited than
articles with male authors (Lariviere et al., 2013), and Dutch
female scientists’ grant applications are less likely to be funded
and receive high “quality of researcher” scores relative to male

colleagues (Van der Lee and Ellemers, 2015).

Experimental evidence bears out these correlational
trends. For example, a laboratory experiment demonstrated
that undergraduate participants were more likely to hire a
male applicant for a mathematical task relative to the identi-
cal female, even when objective performance data were pro-
vided (Reuben et al., 2014). Although it is reasonable to
expect that STEM professionals might not demonstrate these
types of biases (due to their rigorous training in scientific
objectivity), further experimental evidence suggests that gen-
der biases are observed among STEM participants as well as
the general population. For example, both male and female
STEM faculty favored a male lab manager applicant relative
to the identical female applicant (Moss-Racusin et al., 2012)

and were more likely to agree to a mentoring meeting with a
male doctoral candidate than with the identical female can-
didate (Milkman et al., 2015). Thus, persistent gender biases
may significantly undermine women’s advancement within
STEM fields; conversely, developing methods to reduce gen-
der bias may help to broaden women’s participation.

THE NEED FOR EFFECTIVE GENDER BIAS
INTERVENTIONS

Because STEM educators are responsible for training, evalu-
ating, and mentoring the next generation of scientists, they
are a particularly critical target group for evidence-based
interventions designed to reduce gender biases. Simply put,
STEM educators have the opportunity to either perpetuate or
interrupt the transmission of existing gender biases to the
next generation of scientists. Moreover, their willingness to
mentor female students (or lack thereof; Sheltzer and Smith,
2014) may directly affect women’s persistence in academia
(Pfund et al., 2015). Although this population of dedicated
educators may be committed to scientific meritocracy and
fair treatment, experimental evidence suggests that they are
subject to the same subtle gender biases observed in the gen-
eral population (Steinpreis et al., 1999; Moss-Racusin et al.,
2012; Milkman et al., 2015). Moreover, experimental tests
(Moss-Racusin et al., 2012; Milkman et al., 2015) reveal that
life  science faculty (e.g., biologists) are just as likely to
demonstrate gender biases as faculty in other STEM fields
(e.g., physics, mathematics). Thus, it is critical to implement
tested gender bias interventions among life science instruc-
tors, with the broader aim of increasing the participation of
talented female scientists (Moss-Racusin et al., 2014).

There are few validated diversity interventions available,

and almost none targeting STEM instructors’ gender biases
(Moss-Racusin et al., 2014). Problematically, because the
majority of existing interventions have not been subject to sys-
tematic evaluation, the efficacy of current approaches remains
largely unknown (Paluck, 2006; Paluck and Green, 2009). Of
further concern, evidence suggests that some interventions may
actually backfire, exacerbating biases and undermining diversi-
fication efforts (Legault et al., 2011; Dobbin and Kalev, 2013;
Dobbin et al., 2015).

To our knowledge, only two evidence-based interventions
designed to reduce STEM faculty gender biases have been
systematically evaluated and validated in randomized con-
trolled trials (RCTs). Specifically, one intervention increased
awareness of and motivation to address gender bias among
University of Wisconsin–Madison faculty relative to wait-list
controls (Carnes et al., 2015). Another intervention signifi-
cantly reduced male faculty’s implicit (or automatic, noncon-
scious; Nosek et al., 2002) gender biases relative to controls
(Jackson et al., 2014). A third RCT revealed that established
social psychological bias-reduction techniques (e.g., stereo-
type replacement, counterstereotypic imaging) reduced
implicit racial bias, but did not examine gender bias, and
used undergraduate psychology student participants (Devine
et al., 2012). This promising evidence demonstrates the
potential for diversity interventions to bring about meaning-
ful bias-related changes and highlights the need for further
work assessing the effectiveness of gender bias–reduction
interventions among STEM educators.


Intervention to Reduce Gender Biases


ACTION READINESS

Egalitarian attitudes themselves are insufficient to produce pos-
itive changes if they are not also accompanied by relevant
behaviors designed to combat gender bias. Indeed, people who
believe that they are objective often paradoxically express high
levels of gender discrimination, suggesting that biases are fre-
quently unintentional and that egalitarian attitudes do not nec-
essarily ward off inequitable behaviors (Uhlmann and Cohen,
2007). Thus, in addition to increasing awareness of diversity
issues and reducing subtle gender bias, successful interventions
should also increase attendees’ readiness to take action on
diversity-related issues (Moss-Racusin et al., 2014). With this in
mind,   we turned to the literature to identify a theoretically
grounded measure of action readiness.

A large body of literature on self-regulation (i.e., the ways
in which people maintain motivation and focus throughout a
task; Crowe and Higgins, 1997) has identified two primary
strategies for managing goal-related behavior, such as tack-
ling diversity challenges in a professional academic context.
An approach orientation (or promotion focus) emphasizes
goal attainment and accomplishment, such as working hard
to receive a coveted job offer. In a diversity context, someone
utilizing a promotion focus might strive to create positive
interactions and parity between diverse students in the class-
room and actively seek out opportunities to mentor talented
students from a variety of demographic backgrounds. In con-
trast, an avoidance orientation (or prevention focus) is a more
conservative approach focused on risk aversion, such as
working hard to avoid being fired. Someone employing a
prevention focus might attempt to evade discussion of diver-
sity-related topics in the classroom or avoid potentially
uncomfortable diversity-related conversations with mentees.
Previous research has demonstrated that the use of a promo-
tion focus (relative to a prevention focus) is often associated
with superior performance across a host of different types of
tasks (Crowe and Higgins, 1997; Higgins et al., 1997;
Moss-Racusin and Rudman, 2010; Rudman et al., 2012), includ-
ing behavior related to bias and diversity (Trawalter and Rich-
eson, 2006; Does et al., 2011). This work suggests that increased
promotion focus (rather than decreased prevention focus) is the
critical predictor of behavioral outcomes. Thus, we were primar-
ily interested in determining whether promotion focus increased
after exposure to a diversity-training intervention (i.e., that par-
ticipants became more focused on attaining positive diversi-
ty-related outcomes) and also predicted that prevention focus
would not increase (i.e., that participants did not become more

likely to avoid tackling diversity-related challenges).

THE CURRENT RESEARCH

We sought to address gaps in the existing literature by provid-

participate in our study. Those who elected to participate com-
pleted baseline measures (pretest) 2 weeks before attending
the “Scientific Diversity” workshop at a NASI. They then com-
pleted the same set of measures 2 weeks after completing the
workshop (posttest), allowing us to assess change over time.

Our objective was to assess the extent to which the “Scien-
tific Diversity” workshop was associated with improvements in
STEM faculty participants’ awareness of diversity issues, gender
bias, and readiness to take action on diversity issues. We tested
the hypothesis that the “Scientific Diversity” workshop increases
participants’ awareness of gender bias, reduces participants’
gender bias, and increases participants’ readiness to take action
on diversity issues. Specific predictions were as follows:

Prediction 1: Participants’ awareness of diversity issues will
increase from pretest to posttest.

Prediction 2: Participants’ gender bias will decrease from
pretest to posttest.

Prediction 3: Participants will demonstrate optimized action
readiness at pretest relative to posttest, such that their
approach orientation will increase, while their avoidance
orientation will remain stable or decrease.

MATERIALS AND METHOD

Participants

Of 212 total eligible participants (i.e., NASI attendees), 150
completed the survey at pretest and posttest, for an overall par-
ticipation rate of 71%. This is significantly higher than participa-
tion rates typically obtained in field studies of professionals,
which can dip as low as 30% (Steinpreis et al., 1999;
Moss-Racusin et al., 2012). Of these 150 participants, 24 were
participants of color. In keeping with other studies evaluating
the efficacy of diversity interventions (Devine et al., 2012; Prime
et al., 2012), the current analyses were restricted to data from
white participants. The reasoning behind this decision was two-
fold. First, previous research has indicated that participants of
color often respond differently than white participants to issues
pertaining to diversity (Purdie-Vaughns et al., 2008). Thus,
including both white participants and participants of color in
the current study without statistically accounting for participant
race would likely have obscured results. Second, because the
NASI attendees were majority white, it was not possible to col-
lect responses from enough participants from any single racial
minority group to obtain sufficient statistical power to ade-
quately test for racial differences. Thus, to avoid reporting inac-
curate results, we restricted the current analyses to white partic-
ipants, resulting in a final sample of 126 (70% female) for our
primary analyses (although results were unchanged when par-
ticipants of color were included in analyses1). We strongly

ing an evaluation of a workshop called “Scientific Diversity.”      


This brief, evidence-based gender bias intervention has been
widely implemented among life science instructors at the
National Academies Summer Institutes (NASIs), a series of
annual nationwide workshops that train life science faculty in
the principles of scientific teaching (Handelsman et al., 2004,
2007; Wood and Handelsman, 2004; Miller et al., 2008; Pfund
et al., 2009; Couch et al., 2015). To recruit life science instruc-
tors as participants, we partnered with NASI leaders, inviting
life scientists who attended a NASI in the Summer of 2012 to

1Despite these important caveats, we examined whether the overall pattern of
results differed if participants of color were included in analyses. For these 
analy-
ses, we included all 150 participants. Of importance, the observed pattern of
results did not deviate from those obtained with the smaller sample of 126 white
participants. Supporting prediction 1, participants were more aware of diversity
issues following the intervention, b = 0.31, SE = 0.11, 
t(147.99) = 2.96, p = 0.01.
Supporting prediction 2, participants expressed less subtle gender bias 
following
the intervention, b = −0.11, SE = 0.06, t(148.56) 
= −1.99, p = 0.04. Finally, sup-
porting prediction 3, participants expressed greater promotion focus following
the intervention, b = 0.30, SE = 0.06, t(183.57) = 
5.25, p < 0.001, but their pre-
vention focus remained stable, b = −0.04, SE = 0.07, 
t(148.00) = −0.52, p = 0.61.


C. A. Moss-Racusin et al.


suggest that future research attempt to recruit a diverse faculty
participant sample, enabling more sophisticated tests to deter-
mine whether attendees from different racial backgrounds
respond differently to diversity-training interventions.

Participants were academic scientists working primarily in
the life sciences (88% life/biological sciences), with a minority
drawn from other related STEM fields (7% chemistry, 4% phys-
ics, 1% other). Participants’ average age was 45 (SD = 10.48,
range 28–70). Of participants, 13% were full professors, 22%
were associate professors, 19% were assistant professors, 28%
were non–tenure-track instructors, 9% were postdoctoral asso-
ciates, and 9% reported another title. Using the institutional
categories, 71% were from “very high research activity” research
universities (R1), 15% were from “high research activity” or
doctoral/research universities (R2), 10% were from liberal arts
colleges, 2% were from community colleges, and 2% were from

TABLE 1. Design elements (A–D) and measured outcomes (1–3)
of the “Scientific Diversity” workshop intervention, as well as key
results associated with each prediction (1 after 3)ᵃ

Intervention design elements

A Based on existing theory and
empirical evidence

B  Utilized active-learning
techniques to foster
participants’ engagement

C  Presented diversity as a shared
goal; avoided assigning
blame for existing challenges

D  Included evaluation to assess
intervention efficacy

Intervention outcomes     Key result


other types of institutions; 77% taught at public institutions. Of
importance, no significant effects were associated with these
participant demographic variables (t < 1 and p > 0.05 for all

1  Participants’ awareness of
diversity issues

Awareness of diversity issues
increased significantly from
pretest to posttest.


analyses); as a result, they are not discussed further.

“Scientific Diversity” Workshop

2  Participants’ gender bias   Gender bias decreased signifi-

cantly from pretest to
posttest.


Our intervention took the form of an evidence-based workshop
entitled “Scientific Diversity,” which lasted for ~120 min and
has been implemented by more than a dozen different leaders
with more than 1400 scientist participants since 2004 (Wood
and Handelsman, 2004; Pfund et al., 2009). As its name
implies, the goal of the workshop was to take a scientific

3  Participants’ readiness to take
action on diversity-related
issues

Action readiness was optimized,
such that approach orienta-
tion increased significantly
from pretest to posttest,
while avoidance orientation
remained constant.


approach to diversity intervention. Specifically, trained facilita-
tors introduced attendees to empirical social science literature
on the existence and nature of subtle biases and the benefits of
inclusive, heterogeneous learning environments. Of impor-
tance, the workshop was consistent with a framework derived
from a systematic review of the existing literature on the effi-
cacy of existing diversity interventions (Moss-Racusin et al.,
2014).

This framework identified four design elements shared by
successful interventions and recommended the targeting and
assessment of at least three key measurable outcome variables.
Essential design elements were as follows: A) interventions
based on theory and empirical evidence, rather than intuition;

B) approaches that utilize active learning to foster participants’
dynamic engagement with workshop content; C) presentation
of diversity as a shared goal and responsibility rather than as
the fault of one group or individual; and D) incorporation of
rigorous evaluation to assess the intervention’s efficacy. Essen-
tial outcomes were 1) increase in participants’ awareness of
diversity issues; 2) reduction of participants’ biases; and 3) pre-
paredness of participants to take action on diversity-related
issues rather than avoid diversity challenges (see Table 1 for a
list of all intervention design elements, outcome variables, and
associated key results).

Individual NASI leaders and “Scientific Diversity” instruc-
tors were free to tailor the specific workshop activities and
assign preparatory readings based on the particular needs of
attendees (and we accounted for potential outcome differ-
ences associated with this modest pedagogical variability in
our analyses—see Analytic Strategy below), but the “Scientific
Diversity” workshop followed the same general format at each
NASI. This format was consistent with the four design ele-

aThe pretest occurred 2 weeks before participants attended the “Scientific 
Diver-
sity” workshop, and the posttest occurred 2 weeks after the workshop.

ments and three outcomes identified in the diversity interven-
tion framework discussed above (Moss-Racusin et al., 2014).
Specifically, addressing design elements A and B, the work-
shop was designed from the theoretical perspective of “scien-
tific teaching,” an evidence-based approach to teaching that
combines frequent assessment, inclusiveness for diverse stu-
dents, and active learning (a collection of teaching methods
that engage learners and provide practice in scientific think-
ing; Handelsman et al., 2004, 2007; Miller et al., 2008; for a
detailed list of scientific teaching goals and a taxonomy of
observable practices, see Couch et al., 2015). For example,
rather than simply stating in a lecture format that prejudice
can be subtle or that diverse classroom environments opti-
mize learning, instructors gave a detailed, interactive presen-
tation of the empirical research on prevalent automatic or
implicit biases (Greenwald et al., 2015) and the benefits of
heterogeneous learning environments (Chamany et al., 2008).
From  this, instructors generated active discussion, encour-
aging participants to draw their own conclusions from the
data. Specifically, instructors created structured small-group
activities to facilitate participants’ engagement with and criti-
cal analysis of the empirical evidence (targeting outcomes 1
and 2) before returning to a larger group discussion. To help
participants prepare to tackle diversity-related issues (target-
ing outcome 3), instructors and participants practiced tech-
niques for creating an inclusive academic environment, such
as classroom exercises targeting diverse learning styles, men-
toring approaches tailored to the needs of individual students,


Intervention to Reduce Gender Biases


and approaches to mastering difficult conversations about
sensitive or uncomfortable diversity topics.

Addressing design element C, the workshop emphasized
shared responsibility for addressing diversity challenges and
avoided assigning blame for diversity issues. For example, facili-
tators shared empirical findings indicating that subtle cultural
stereotypes are pervasive (Devine, 1989); thus, biases are often
expressed even by well-intentioned individuals who value egali-
tarianism and fairness (Uhlmann and Cohen, 2007). Addition-
ally, instructors stressed that the literature typically does not
indicate differences between people belonging to different
demographic groups (e.g., male faculty are no more likely
than female faculty to exhibit bias against women in STEM;
Moss-Racusin et al., 2012; Milkman et al., 2015), suggesting that
the  blame for diversity challenges does not lie with members of
specific groups. Finally, addressing design element D, this paper
reports the findings of the first evaluation of the intervention’s
efficacy. Additional systematic assessments are ongoing.

We measured the three key outcome variables identified

by the diversity intervention framework discussed in the
introduction (Moss-Racusin et al., 2014). Although the work-
shop touched on the importance of diversity broadly defined
(including diversity associated with racial background, age,
learning style, etc.), it particularly emphasized literature and
activities on gender diversity and bias. For this reason, we
focused the assessment on variables pertaining to gender bias,
though future work should assess additional potential effects
on other types of bias.

Awareness of Diversity Issues (Outcome 1)

Previous research has indicated that increasing participants’
awareness and knowledge of diversity issues is a critical compo-
nent of successful diversity interventions (Shields et al., 2011;
Carnes et al., 2012, 2015; Prime et al., 2012; Zawadzki et al.,
2012). Although prior work has assessed this construct by
directly asking participants to self-report the extent to which
they are aware of diversity issues (e.g., Prime et al., 2012),
these measures may be hampered by social desirability con-
cerns, particularly after repeated measurements. That is, such
explicit measures may alert participants to the nature of the
construct being measured and lead them to edit their responses
accordingly (see the Discussion section for an analysis of social
desirability concerns pertinent to the current research).

Thus, drawing upon the existing literature, we chose to
assess this construct in a slightly more indirect way. Specifically,
one indicator of increased diversity awareness is attendees’
heightened ability to accurately detect the relative homogeneity
of  their environment (Case, 2007). We predicted that partici-
pants would be more likely to perceive the relative lack of diver-
sity in their home departments (which likely reflected the con-
sistent nationwide underrepresentation of women and people
of color in STEM fields; NSF, 2012) following their exposure to
the “Scientific Diversity” workshop. We chose to focus on the
perceived diversity of participants’ departments (rather than
their larger academic institutions) due to the fact that, although
college and university communities as a whole now often
approach gender parity, women remain significantly underrep-
resented within many STEM departments (NSF, 2012). Thus,
assessment at the department rather than institutional level
provided a more precise measurement of the relevant underly-

ing construct. Specifically, we utilized the item “To what extent
do you think that your own department is diverse?” Participants
responded using the scale 1 (not at all diverse) to 7 (very
diverse). This scale was reverse-coded, such that higher num-
bers indicate more awareness of diversity issues.

Subtle Gender Bias (Outcome 2)

In keeping with previous research (Moss-Racusin et al., 2012)
we measured a subtle, contemporary form of bias. We reasoned
that, as committed instructors and mentors, participants would
be unlikely to display traditional, “old-fashioned” intentional
forms of bias, characterized by explicit hostility toward and an
overt intention to prevent the success of stigmatized groups
(such as racial minorities and women; Glick and Fiske, 1996;
Dovidio and Gaertner, 2004). Rather, we investigated a more
subtle form of modern bias, which stems from pervasive cultural
stereotypes, frequently exists beyond individuals’ conscious
awareness, and does not reflect an overt intention to discrimi-
nate  or cause harm. Thus, we employed the widely used and
well-validated Modern Sexism Scale (Swim et al., 1995, 2005)
to   assess subtle gender bias. This scale includes eight items,
such as “Discrimination against women is no longer a problem
in the United States” and “Over the past few years, the govern-
ment and news media have been showing more concern about
the treatment of women than is warranted by women’s actual
experiences,” to which participants responded on a scale of 1
(disagree strongly) to 7 (agree strongly). Endorsement of these
items reflects subtle, contemporary gender bias (e.g., dismissing
or minimizing concerns about ongoing gender discrimination).
Responses to items were averaged to create the Modern Sexism
Scale, on which higher numbers indicated greater levels of sub-
tle gender bias (αpreintervention = 0.84, 
αpostintervention = 0.85).

Action Readiness (Outcome 3)

We used a previously validated scale (Rudman et al., 2012) tai-
lored to diversity goals to measure acute levels of both promo-
tion and prevention foci as related to handling diversity-related
challenges. Ten promotion focus items included “Right at this
minute, in terms of my approach to diversity, I’m feeling … free
to pursue my goals/confident that I can go after my goals/
focused on what I will achieve.” Ten prevention focus items
included “Right at this minute, in terms of my approach to
diversity, I’m feeling … as though I need to avoid risks/like I
don’t want to make any mistakes/like I want to make sure noth-
ing bad happens.” Responses were indicated on a 1 (strongly
disagree) to 7 (strongly agree) scale. Items reflecting promotion
and prevention focus were averaged separately to form the pro-
motion (αPretest = 0.81, αPosttest = 0.88) and prevention 
(αPretest =
0.89, αPosttest = 0.90) focus scales, with higher numbers 
reflecting
greater levels of promotion or prevention focus.

PROCEDURE

Participants were attendees at one of seven NASIs that were
held nationwide between May and August 2012. These NASIs
were designed to train life science instructors in the principles
of scientific teaching (Handelsman et al., 2004, 2007; Miller
et al., 2008; Couch et al., 2015) and are described in detail else-
where (Wood and Handelsman, 2004; Pfund et al., 2009).
Attendees from each of the seven 2012 NASIs participated in
our study. Specifically, 2012 NASIs took place at the University


C. A. Moss-Racusin et al.


of Georgia–Athens (study participant N = 22), West Virginia
University (study participant N = 12), Harvard University (study
participant N = 25), University of Minnesota–Twin Cities (study
participant N = 20), Louisiana State University (study participant
N    = 13), Evergreen State College (study participant N = 
19), and
University of Colorado–Boulder (study participant N = 15). Each
NASI included the “Scientific Diversity” workshop approximately
two-thirds of the way through the weeklong curriculum.

Attendees were invited to participate in the current research
after their NASI acceptance. During the online NASI registration
process, NASI leaders informed attendees that they would be
invited to participate in a research project conducted by an affil-
iated research team housed at Yale University that was not
involved in delivering the NASI. To reduce self-selection con-
cerns, we disguised the true nature of the study; participants
were told that we were interested in learning about their general
social attitudes, for the purposes of refining existing professional
development programs. Assessments took place at two time
points, and all measures were completed online using partici-
pants’ own computers. At pretest (2 weeks before attending the
NASI), participants received an emailed invitation to participate
in the study originating from the email address of one of the
authors (M.J.G.). After granting informed consent, participants
ensured that their responses would remain anonymous by creat-
ing a unique participant ID code, which enabled their responses
at the two time points to be linked without being associated with
their identity. They then completed an online questionnaire cre-
ated using the survey administration program Qualtrics. This
survey included all measures presented in a random order, and
items within each measure were also randomized.

Participants who completed the pretest questionnaire

received another emailed invitation to complete a nearly identi-
cal online questionnaire at posttest (2 weeks following the com-
pletion of the NASI). Although some prior work has investigated
the immediate impact of bias-reduction techniques (e.g., Lai
et al., 2014), comparatively few studies have assessed lon-
ger-term postintervention effects. Thus, we sought to measure
the extent to which the intervention was associated with changes
in participants’ awareness of diversity issues, subtle gender bias,
and action readiness after the passage of a reasonable amount
of time and once they had returned to their home environments.
We also included an immediate postintervention assessment
for a subset of participants and measures, as described in the
Supplemental Analyses section below. The only difference
between the pre- and posttest questionnaires was that partici-
pant demographics were not collected at the pretest and instead
were measured only at the end of the posttest (to ensure that
measuring demographics did not impact participants’ responses
to other questions; Steele and Aronson, 1995).

On completion of the posttest measures, participants under-

went a “funnel debriefing” (designed to probe for unusually
high levels of suspicion that might render results invalid) before
being fully informed as to the nature and goals of the current
research (Bargh and Chartrand, 2000).2 No participants

2A funnel debriefing is designed to detect any participants who accurately 
identi-
fied the true nature of the research, because this unusually high level of 
aware-
ness could have distorted their responses (Bargh and Chartrand, 2000). However,
it is not sufficient to simply inform participants of the purpose of the 
experiment
and then ask them to report whether they had inferred it at any point, because

reported problematic suspicions. Participants who completed
the pretest measures but elected not to complete the posttest
measures underwent the debriefing after the posttest data col-
lection period had ended. After being fully debriefed, partici-
pants were thanked for their time. No compensation was
offered in exchange for participation. The study was reviewed
and determined to be exempt by the Yale University Institu-
tional Review Board.

SUPPLEMENTAL DATA COLLECTION: IMMEDIATE
POSTINTERVENTION EFFECTS

A subset of participants (N = 78) also completed the
action-readiness scales immediately after completing the “Sci-
entific Diversity” workshop, to assess the acute relationship
between attending the workshop and propensity to engage in
behaviors addressing diversity challenges. Immediately follow-
ing the intervention, all participants were given the option to
complete paper-and-pencil versions of the promotion
focus (αimmediately postintervention = 0.86) and prevention 
focus

(αimmediately postintervention = 0.84) subscales. The scales 
were adminis-

tered in the same room as the “Scientific Diversity” workshop,

and scale items were presented in one of two random orders.
The demographics of the subset of participants who chose to
complete these immediate postintervention scales did not
meaningfully differ from the full sample.3

RESULTS

Analytic Strategy

Because the data were collected at different NASIs held across
the country during the Summer of 2012, there were many
potential sources of variability that could have influenced par-
ticipants’ responses to the surveys. For example, there might
have been preexisting differences associated with participants’
choices to attend one NASI over another. Moreover, each NASI
was run by different organizers, was held at a different aca-
demic institution, exposed participants to different coattendees,
and so on. Finally, the “Scientific Diversity” workshop at each
NASI was taught by different instructors. Thus, it was necessary
to ensure that our statistical approach accounted for the poten-
tial variability across NASIs and successfully assessed change in

known “hindsight bias” effects could distort the accuracy of their reports 
(Hawkins
and Hastie, 1990). Instead, a funnel debriefing involves posing increasingly 
spe-
cific questions to probe for participants’ levels of awareness before fully 
revealing
the true nature of the research. In this case, we first broadly asked 
participants to
report their perceptions of the aim of the study. Next, participants were asked 
to
indicate whether anything had seemed suspicious or “off” at any point during the
study. Finally, participants were told that the study was not solely intended to
measure general social attitudes, for the purposes of refining existing 
professional
development programs (i.e., the cover story they had been presented), and were
asked  to speculate as to possible true aims of the study.

3Seventy-eight white participants (62% of the full white sample) chose to com-
plete the immediate postintervention measures (data from an additional 20 par-
ticipants of color were not analyzed, consistent with the rationale described 
in the
Participants section above). Of the subset of participants, 94% were 
life/biological
scientists, 3% were chemists, 2% were physicists, and 1% was from another field;
72%  of this subset was female and had an average age of 44 (SD = 
10.65, range
30 – 64). Further, 13% were full professors, 18% were associate professors, 23%
were assistant professors, 25% were non–tenure-track instructors, 12% were
postdoctoral associates, and 9.0% reported another title; 65% were from R1 uni-
versities, 16% were from R2 universities, 13% were from liberal arts colleges, 
4%
were from community colleges, and 2% were from other types of institutions;
87% taught at public institutions.


Intervention to Reduce Gender Biases


the variables of interest over time beyond the potential variance
associated with different “Scientific Diversity” workshops.

In other words, to take into account the fact that the time
points were nested within participants and participants were
nested within NASIs, which might have led to nonindependent
observations (Kenny and Judd, 1986, 1996), we conducted
linear mixed-effects modeling analyses in SPSS (version 20.0).
We specified a random intercepts multilevel model (which
allows the intercepts to vary) with a variance components
(VCs) covariance structure. This structure models a different
VC for each random effect, meaning that the errors of the dif-
ferent levels are independent from one another. We included
time point (pretest = 0; posttest = 1) and gender (female 
= 0;
male = 1) as fixed effects and participant and which NASI par-

4.5

4

3.5

3

2.5

2

1.5

Pre-Intervention  Post-Intervention

Subtle Gender
Bias

Diversity
Awareness


ticipants attended as random effects.

The random effect of NASI was not significant for each of
the analyses.4 This indicates that there was no greater correla-
tion between the responses of participants within summer
institute than there was between the participants in general,
suggesting that responses did not vary systematically as a func-
tion of which NASI participants attended (i.e., were not non-
independent at the level of NASI).

We also considered the role of participant gender in our
analyses. Although the majority of previous research found that
men and women are equally likely to express gender biases
(Moss-Racusin et al., 2012; Milkman et al., 2015), some past
research has suggested that men may exhibit slightly higher
Modern Sexism Scale scores than women (Swim et al., 1995,
2005). To account for any potential differences between male
and female participants, we thus included gender as a covariate
in all analyses.

EVIDENCE OF INTERVENTION EFFECTIVENESS

In keeping with predictions 1–3, evidence emerged to support
the efficacy of the “Scientific Diversity” workshop in that partic-
ipants exhibited positive diversity-related changes 2 week after
their exposure to the intervention relative to 2 weeks before the
intervention (Figures 1 and 2). Supporting prediction 1, partici-
pants demonstrated increased awareness of diversity issues
2 weeks after the diversity intervention, indicated by heightened
awareness of the relative demographic homogeneity of their
academic departments, b = 0.22, SE = 0.11, t(123.82) 
= 1.96,
p   = 0.04. Supporting prediction 2, participants also demon-

FIGURE 1. Means for subtle gender bias and diversity awareness
variables measured at pretest (2 weeks before the “Scientific
Diversity” workshop) and posttest (2 weeks after the “Scientific
Diversity” workshop). Scales range from 1 to 7, with higher
numbers reflecting a greater extent of each variable (a truncated
scale range is presented for ease of interpretation). After the
intervention, diversity awareness increased significantly (p = 0.04),
and subtle gender bias decreased significantly (p = 0.03). N 
= 126.

avoidance orientation (prevention focus) remained stable,

b = −0.03, SE = 0.08, t(124.06) = 
−0.45, p = 0.66.

THE ROLE OF PARTICIPANT GENDER

Participant gender did not significantly impact the awareness of
diversity issues or action readiness outcomes, t < 0.95 and
p > 0.34 for all analyses. That is, male and female faculty did
not demonstrate different levels of awareness of diversity issues
or action readiness. However, a significant main effect of partic-
ipant gender on subtle gender bias was observed at pretest.
This indicates that, before the intervention, male participants
displayed higher levels of modern sexism (M = 2.79, SD = 
0.76)

5.5

5

4.5

Promotion


strated reduced subtle gender bias, as shown by a decrease in
scores on the Modern Sexism Scale after the diversity interven-
tion, b = −0.13, SE = 0.06, t(124.53) = 
−2.14, p = 0.03. Finally,
supporting prediction 3, attendees showed evidence of readi-
ness to take action on diversity issues: their approach orienta-
tion (promotion focus) increased after the diversity training,
b = 0.30, SE = 0.06, t(123.62) = 4.80, p < 0.001, while 
their

4

3.5

3

Pre-Intervention   Post-Intervention

Prevention


4The model for subtle gender bias did not converge, because the final Hessian
matrix was not positive definite, suggesting that there was no variation in the 
data
for the random effect of the summer institute. Hence, we ran the analysis 
exclud-
ing this random effect and report its results. Though the random effect for sum-
mer institute was not significant for awareness of diversity issues and action
readiness, no convergence problems occurred for these dependent variables. As
conducting the analyses excluding this random effect yielded nearly identical 
esti-
mates, we report the results from the analyses that included both random effects
for these variables.

FIGURE 2. Means for action-readiness variables measured at
pretest (2 weeks before the “Scientific Diversity” workshop) and
posttest (2 weeks after the “Scientific Diversity” workshop). Scales
range from 1 to 7, with higher numbers reflecting a greater extent
of each variable (a truncated scale range is presented for ease of
interpretation). After the intervention, approach orientation
(promotion  focus) increased significantly (p < 0.001), while
avoidance orientation (prevention focus) was unaffected (p = 0.66).
N   = 126.


C. A. Moss-Racusin et al.


than did female participants (M = 2.38, SD = 0.89), t(124) 
=
2.49, p = 0.01. This indicates that our pretest data support some
prior research suggesting that, under some circumstances, men
may express higher levels of gender bias than women (Swim
et al., 1995, 2005).

Notably, this gender difference was no longer present at
posttest, t(123) = 1.46, p = 0.15, suggesting that the 
interven-
tion may have been particularly effective at reducing male par-
ticipants’ subtle gender bias. However, the interaction between
gender and time did not significantly predict subtle gender bias,
b = −0.17, SE = 0.13, t(123.39) = 
−1.27, p = 0.21. This suggests
that, even though the differences between men and women
were significant at pretest but not at posttest, the broader inter-
action effect of time and gender was not reliable. Thus, we cau-

5.5

5

4.5

4

3.5

3

Pre-Intervention  Immediate  Post-Intervention

Promotion
Prevention


tion against drawing strong conclusions from the pretest gen-
der difference in subtle gender bias without further replication
(see Discussion section).

SUPPLEMENTAL ANALYSES: IMMEDIATE
POSTINTERVENTION EFFECTS

As discussed in the Supplemental Data Collection section above,
a subsample of participants completed the action readiness
scales immediately postintervention, in addition to the pre- and
posttest. To compare action readiness results across three
points for this subsample, we performed linear mixed-effects
modeling analyses that included time point with three levels
(pretest = −1; immediately postintervention = 0; 
2-weeks
posttest = 1) and gender (female = 0; male = 1) as 
fixed effects
and participant and summer institute as random effects. To
account for the possibility that the error terms within each sub-
ject were correlated, we also specified a first-order autoregres-
sive covariance matrix for the residuals.

Consistent with prediction 3, immediate postintervention
action readiness results for this subsample mirrored the
2-week posttest results obtained with the full sample, in that
the main effect of time for avoidance orientation was not sig-
nificant, F(2, 136.10) = 0.73, p = 0.48, but the main effect 
of
time for approach orientation was significant, F(2, 138.46) =
5.91, p = 0.003 (see Figure 3).5 Pairwise comparisons indi-
cated that participants’ approach orientation (“promotion
focus”) not only increased directly after the diversity training

FIGURE 3. Means for action-readiness variables measured at

pretest (2 weeks before the “Scientific Diversity” workshop),
immediately following the intervention, and posttest (2 weeks after
the “Scientific Diversity” workshop). Scales range from 1 to 7, with
higher numbers reflecting a greater extent of each variable (a
truncated scale range is presented for ease of interpretation). After
the intervention, approach orientation (promotion focus) in-
creased significantly (p = 0.003), and remained constant 2 weeks
later, while avoidance orientation (prevention focus) did not
change after the intervention (p = 0.48), and was also unchanged 2
weeks later. N = 78.

to systematic evaluation (Moss-Racusin et al., 2014). Our
results reflect promising evidence suggesting that a scientific
approach to the design, assessment, and implementation of
diversity interventions can be linked to positive outcomes.

Specifically, these findings have critical implications for
STEM educators, in that they suggest that life scientists’ subtle
or unintentional gender biases may be mitigated by effective
interventions. The evidence-based “Scientific Diversity” work-
shop was associated with increased awareness of diversity issues
(supporting prediction 1), reduced subtle gender bias (support-
ing prediction 2), and heightened propensity to take action to
address diversity challenges (supporting prediction 3) on the
part of life science instructors. Because these participants regu-
larly interact with the next generation of scientists, they reflect
an important group to target with diversity interventions.

While improvements in awareness of diversity issues and


∆t1−t2

= −0.20, p = 0.03), but that, as discussed in Results

reduced gender bias are heartening outcomes, they are by


above, this effect remained 2 weeks after the training (MΔt2−t3

= −0.08, p = 0.40; MΔt1−t3 = −0.28, p = 
0.001).

DISCUSSION

This research addressed a critical gap in the existing literature
by testing the efficacy of a gender bias intervention targeting
STEM instructors. Although calls for STEM diversity interven-
tions have increased (Al-Gazali et al., 2013; Nature, 2015),
there are few existing interventions available for implementa-
tion, and of these interventions, almost none have been subject

5The estimated variance for each repeated promotion measure was significant, 
σ2

= 0.27, SE = 0.04, Wald Z = 7.44, p < 0.001; The 
estimated correlation between
consecutive promotion measurements was not significant, ρ = 
−0.14, SE = 0.15,
Wald  Z = −0.92, p = 0.357. The estimated variance 
for each repeated prevention
measure was significant, σ2 = 0.37, SE = 0.05, Wald 
Z = 7.49, p < 0.001; the
estimated correlation between consecutive promotion measurements was not sig-
nificant, ρ = −0.11, SE = 0.15, Wald Z 
= −0.75, p = 0.454.

themselves insufficient. Effective diversity interventions must
also increase participants’ readiness to engage in behaviors that
promote gender parity. Thus, the current action readiness
results are particularly salient: the “Scientific Diversity” work-
shop was associated with increased approach orientation (i.e.,
promotion focus) and was not related to heightened avoidance
orientation (i.e., prevention focus). That is, participants exhib-
ited optimized action readiness following the intervention, such
that they were more focused on engaging with their diversity
goals and were not more reactive or avoidant.

This pattern of results is promising, in that heightened
approach orientation (rather than reduced avoidance orienta-
tion) has been identified as a critical predictor of positive out-
comes across a wide variety of domains (Crowe and Higgins,
1997; Higgins et al., 1997; Moss-Racusin and Rudman, 2010;
Rudman et al., 2012), including increased support for social
equality (Does et al., 2011) and preserved executive functioning
after interracial interactions (Trawalter and Richeson, 2006). As


Intervention to Reduce Gender Biases


a result, approach orientation was the primary action readiness
variable of interest in the current research. These action readi-
ness results highlight the potential benefits of promoting parity
by working toward positive diversity goals, rather than warning
against the possibility of diversity setbacks, and further under-
score the importance of actively engaging attendees in diversity
goals rather than blaming them for existing challenges.

Positive changes in all variables were observed during the
monthlong period from pretest to posttest (as well as immedi-
ately following the intervention for action readiness), highlight-
ing the potential of the “Scientific Diversity” workshop to initiate
long-term progress. Although the effects of time point may
appear modest, it is important to note that they are statistically
significant (where noted and predicted) after adjusting for all
NASI site-specific differences. That is, these changes in partici-
pants’ diversity awareness, subtle bias, and action readiness
were observed above and beyond any differences associated
with each specific NASI (such as the different individuals leading
the workshop, the various times over the summer when each
workshop took place, the different people—and unique person-
alities—at each NASI, varying resources and facilities). Thus, the
predicted results are robust to these site-specific fluctuations.

Consistent with some prior work (Swim et al., 1995, 2005),
results revealed that male participants expressed higher levels
of subtle gender bias than did female participants at pretest. In
contrast, there was no significant sex difference at posttest, rais-
ing the possibility that the “Scientific Diversity” workshop may
have been particularly effective at targeting male participants’
gender biases. We caution against strong interpretation of these
results without further replication, in part because the interac-
tion of participant gender and time was not significant. Addi-
tionally, the majority of existing work has not revealed gender
differences in participants’ gender biases (Moss-Racusin et al.,
2012; Milkman et al., 2015). At a minimum, the current results
suggest that additional work is needed to shed light on the ways
in which diversity interventions can be tailored to most effec-
tively address the various needs and perspectives of attendees
from different demographic backgrounds.

LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS

Both the findings and limitations of this work highlight import-
ant avenues for future research. The present study is not an
RCT and thus cannot generate definitive information about
causal relationships. That is, because participants were not ran-
domly assigned to an intervention or control condition, we can-
not conclusively determine that the positive effects observed on
our outcome variables were due to the intervention itself. These
positive changes could be attributable to other factors that
occurred during the month between measurements (e.g.,
engaging in cooperative group work at the NASI, attending one
of  the other NASI workshops) or the mere passage of time itself.
However, the confluence of positive results across our three dif-
ferent outcomes is promising, as is the fact that the immediate
postintervention results for action readiness mirrored those
obtained   2 weeks later at posttest. Additionally, this type of
correlational evidence is necessary to provide preliminary sup-
port   for the efficacy of an intervention, laying the groundwork
for subsequent complex (and expensive) RCTs (Moss-Racusin
et al., 2014). Nonetheless, future research should expand upon
these results by conducting an RCT to determine whether the

positive changes observed here are directly attributable to the
“Scientific Diversity” workshop.

Future research should also assess the extent to which these
results generalize to other participant populations. Participa-
tion in the current study was voluntary, and results may thus be
subject to some self-selection biases. We sought to mitigate
these concerns by disguising the true nature of the research to
avoid the possibility that only individuals who were particularly
interested in gender bias might choose to participate in the
study. Additionally, the current sample was not necessarily rep-
resentative of the underlying population of life science instruc-
tors. For example, women were overrepresented in the current
sample, reflective of the demographic characteristics of NASI
attendees. Future research should thus utilize a randomly
selected, representative participant sample to assess the extent
to which the current results generalize to other groups. Addi-
tionally, the current research relied on a single-item measure of
awareness of diversity issues. Specifically, we assessed the
extent to which participants were aware of the relative demo-
graphic homogeneity of their home departments. Future work
should utilize other multi-item measures of this construct to
assess the replicability of the current results.

In keeping with other studies evaluating diversity interven-

tions (Devine et al., 2012; Prime et al., 2012), the current anal-
yses did not include data from participants of color. Because
people of color often respond differently than white people on
measures pertaining to diversity issues (e.g., Purdie-Vaughns
et  al., 2008), it is essential to statistically account for participant
race in this type of research. The low numbers of participants
of color in our sample did not afford sufficient statistical power
to conduct these analyses. Thus, to avoid distorting results, we
limited the current analyses to white participants (although,
as noted in footnote 1, results did not change when participants
of color were included in analyses). Future research should
include a plan to recruit racially diverse participant samples in
order to robustly examine any potential racial differences in the
efficacy of diversity interventions. Moreover, moving beyond
gender biases, it is essential to address potential racial, ethnic,
and other types of biases in STEM fields. These biases should be
the sole focus of future research and interventions.

The current research assessed the extent to which partici-

pants were poised to engage in behaviors designed to address
gender bias by assessing their approach orientation (i.e., pro-
motion focus) and avoidance orientation (i.e., prevention
focus). It is worth noting that promotion and prevention
goal-pursuit strategies are independent of actual goal content
(Crowe and Higgins, 1997). For example, two people could
pursue different diversity goals (e.g., making sure not to spend
extra time with male mentees vs. fairly evaluating the compe-
tence of female students) while both employing a promotion
focus. Of importance, prior work has suggested that promotion
focus is associated with improved outcomes regardless of spe-
cific goal content (Higgins et al., 1997; Moss-Racusin and
Rudman, 2010; Rudman et al., 2012). That is, it appears that
goal strategy (promotion or prevention) is the critical construct
relevant for predicting behavioral outcomes, rather than the
precise nature of the goal itself.

Thus, in keeping with previous research, we chose to focus

on participants’ levels of promotion and prevention foci regard-
ing the pursuit of their diversity goals, rather than measuring


C. A. Moss-Racusin et al.


participants’ idiosyncratic definitions of personal diversity–
related behavioral goals. One potential shortcoming associated
with this approach is that it does not rule out the possibility that
participants developed somewhat neutral or weak diversity-re-
lated goals (e.g., letting issues resolve themselves) but pursued
these goals using a promotion focus. In this case, participants
would report high levels of promotion focus but may not actu-
ally be working vigorously to address diversity issues. However,
because of the active, approach-oriented nature of a promotion
focus, it is somewhat difficult to pursue neutral goals using this
strategy; indeed, it is challenging to envision how one might
actively pursue a goal that is, by definition, inactive. Future
research should address this concern by including a measure-
ment of the specific diversity-related goals identified by partici-
pants, as well as their promotion and prevention focus.

Finally, our results may be subject to some social desirability
concerns. That is, if participants guessed the true purpose of the
study, they may have attempted to provide socially desirable
responses. Thus, results could reflect this desire to respond in a
“politically correct” manner rather than genuine improvements
in outcomes. This concern is mitigated by at least two factors.
First, participants did not report guessing the true purpose of
the study during the debriefing. Second, a large body of litera-
ture suggests that biases stem from a two-step process, involv-
ing both activation and expression (e.g., Bodenhausen and Mac-
rae, 1998). Thus, even if the current intervention did not
undermine the activation of biases, the fact that participants
were aware of and motivated to express the socially desirable
response suggests that the intervention may have positively
affected the expression of gender biases. It may not be neces-
sary (or possible) for diversity interventions to eradicate all
traces of participants’ biases. Instead, successful interventions
could operate efficiently on participants’ motivations and abili-
ties not to act on biased responses even if they are activated.
Again, future research utilizing an RCT design should address
these issues and should include additional outcomes that are
less subject to possible social desirability concerns (e.g., implicit
and behavioral measures).

Relatedly, the subgroup of participants who completed the

immediate postintervention measures encountered an addi-
tional exposure to the action readiness scales relative to the rest
of the sample. This increased familiarity could have heightened
their ability to identify the true purpose of the study, and thus
adjust their responses accordingly (i.e., demand characteris-
tics). This concern is alleviated by the fact that this subgroup
was no more likely than the rest of the sample to guess the true
purpose of the study during the debriefing. Moreover, results
drawn from this subsample did not significantly differ from
other participants at posttest, suggesting that any additional
demand characteristics were unlikely to have meaningfully
impacted the responses of participants who completed the
postintervention measures.

CONCLUSIONS

Lingering gender biases can undermine the representation of
women in STEM, ultimately restricting access to talented pro-
fessionals (Moss-Racusin et al., 2012). By clearing obstacles
facing talented female scientists, effective diversity interven-
tions thus hold the potential not only to broaden women’s par-
ticipation but also to enhance the quality and pace of scientific

progress. Despite calls for their widespread implementation in
the STEM community, few evidence-based, validated diversity
interventions are presently available. The current research
revealed promising evidence of the efficacy of one such inter-
vention. We hope that these results will help to generate addi-
tional research investigating scientific approaches to the devel-
opment, evaluation, and implementation of effective diversity
interventions.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We are grateful to the 2012 NASI leaders and “Scientific Diver-
sity” workshop instructors for their partnership and invaluable
assistance with data collection and for the participation of NASI
attendees. Key personnel who designed, revised, and facilitated
the “Scientific Diversity” workshop include J. Frederick, J. Labov,

R. Lue, S. Miller, C. Pfund, and J. Stith. We thank M. de Rooij for
statistical consultation. This work was supported in part by
Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI) Professors Program
2010 grant 52007053 and HHMI grant 52007129 to J.H., Alfred

P. Sloan Foundation grant 213-3-15 to J.H. and C.A.M.-R., and
Alfred P. Sloan Foundation grant B2013-38 to C.A.M.-R.

REFERENCES

Al-Gazali L, Valian V, Barnes B, Wu LA, Andrei EY, Handelsman J, Moss-Racusin
CA, Husu L (2013). Scientists of the world speak up for equality. Nature
495, 35–38.

Bargh JA, Chartrand TL (2000). The mind in the middle: a practical guide to
priming and automaticity research. In: Handbook of Research Methods
in Social and Personality Psychology, ed. HT Reis and CM Judd, New
York: Cambridge University Press, 253–285.

Bever L (2015). Nobel Prize-winning scientist Tim Hunt resigns after comment-
ing on the “trouble with girls.” Washington Post. www.washingtonpost

.com/news/morning-mix/wp/2015/06/11/nobel-prize-winning-scientist

-tim-hunt-resigns-position-after-commenting-on-the-trouble-with-girls
(accessed 23 July 2015).

Bodenhausen GV, Macrae CN (1998). Stereotype activation and inhibition.
In: Stereotype Activation and Inhibition: Advances in Social Cognition,
ed. RS Wyer, Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 1–52.

Carnes M, Devine PG, Manwell LB, Byars-Winston A, Fine E, Ford CE, Forscher
P, Isaac C, Kaatz A, Magua W, et al. (2015). The effect of an intervention
to break the gender bias habit for faculty at one institution: a cluster
randomized, controlled trial. Acad Med 90, 221–230.

Carnes M, Devine PG, Manwell LB, Ford CE, Byars-Winston A, Fine E, Sheri-
dan JT (2012). Promoting institutional change through bias literacy. J
Divers High Educ 5, 63–77.

Case KA (2007). Raising male privilege awareness and reducing sexism: an
evaluation of diversity courses. Psychol Women Q 31, 426–435.

Ceci SJ, Ginther DK, Kahn S, Williams WM (2014). Women in academic sci-
ence: a changing landscape. Psychol Sci Pub Int 15, 75–141.

Chamany K, Allen D, Tanner K (2008). Making biology learning relevant to
students: integrating people, history, and context into college biology
teaching. CBE Life Sci Educ 7, 267–278.

Couch BA, Brown TL, Schelpat TJ, Graham MJ, Knight JK (2015). Scientific
teaching: defining a taxonomy of observable practices. CBE Life Sci Educ
14, ar9.

Crowe E, Higgins ET (1997). Regulatory focus and strategic inclinations:
promotion and prevention in decision-making. Organ Behav Hum 69,
117–132.

Dasgupta D (2011). Ingroup experts and peers as social vaccines who inocu-
late the self-concept: the stereotype inoculation model. Psychol Inq 22,
231–246.

Dasgupta N, Scircle MM, Hunsinger M (2015). Female peers in small work
groups enhance women’s motivation, verbal participation, and career
aspirations in engineering. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 112, 4988–4993.


Intervention to Reduce Gender Biases


Devine PG (1989). Stereotypes and prejudice: their automatic and controlled
components. J Pers Soc Psychol 56, 5–18.

Devine PG, Forscher PS, Austin AJ, Cox WTL (2012). Long-term reduction in
implicit race bias: a prejudice habit-breaking intervention. J Exp Soc Psy-
chol 48, 1267–1278.

Dobbin F, Kalev A (2013). The origins and effects of corporate diversity pro-
grams. In: The Oxford Handbook of Diversity and Work, ed. QM Rober-
son, Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 253–281.

Dobbin F, Schrage D, Kalev A (2015). Rage against the iron cage, the varied
effects of bureaucratic personnel reforms on diversity. Am Sociol Rev 80,
1014–1044.

Does S, Derks B, Ellemers N (2011). Thou shalt not discriminate: how empha-
sizing moral ideals rather than obligations increases whites’ support for
social equality. J Exp Soc Psychol 47, 562–571.

Dovidio JF, Gaertner SL (2004). Aversive racism. In: Advances in Experimental
Social Psychology, ed. MP Zanna, New York: Elsevier, 1–51.

Eddy SL, Brownell SE, Wenderoth MP (2014). Gender gaps in achievement
and participation in multiple introductory biology classrooms. CBE Life
Sci Educ 13, 478–492.

Finson KD, Beaver JB, Cramond BL (1995). Development and field test of a
checklist for the draw-a-scientist test. School Sci Math 95, 195–205.

Glick P, Fiske ST (1996). The ambivalent sexism inventory: differentiating hos-
tile and benevolent sexism. J Pers Soc Psychol 70, 491–512.

Greenwald AG, Banaji MR, Nosek BA (2015). Statistically small effects of the
Implicit Association Test can have societally large effects. J Pers Soc Psy-
chol 108, 553–561.

Handelsman J, Ebert-May D, Beichner R, Bruns P, Chang A, DeHaan R,
Gentile J, Lauffer S, Stewart J, Tilghman SM, et al. (2004). Scientific
teaching. Science 304, 521–522.

Handelsman J, Miller S, Pfund C (2007). Scientific Teaching, New York:
Freeman.

Hawkins SA, Hastie R (1990). Hindsight: biased judgments of past events after
the outcomes are known. Psychol Bull 107, 311–327.

Higgins ET, Shah J, Friedman R (1997). Emotional responses to goal attain-
ment: strength of regulatory focus as a moderator. J Pers Soc Psychol
72, 515–525.

Jackson SM, Hillard AL, Schneider TR (2014). Using implicit bias training to
improve attitudes toward women in STEM. Soc Psychol Educ 17, 419–438.

Kenny DA, Judd CM (1986). Consequences of violating the independence
assumption in analysis of variance. Psychol Bull 99, 422–431.

Kenny DA, Judd CM (1996). A general procedure for the estimation of inter-
dependence. Psychol Bull 119, 138–148.

Lai CK, Marini M, Lehr SA, Cerruti C, Shin JEL, Joy-Gaba JA, Ho AK, Teachman
BA, Wojcik SP, Koleva SP, et al. (2014). Reducing implicit racial preferenc-
es. I. A comparative investigation of 17 interventions. J Exp Psychol Gen
143, 1765–1785.

Lariviere V, Ni C, Gingras Y, Cronin B, Sugimoto CR (2013). Bibliometrics:
global gender disparities in science. Nature 504, 211–213.

Legault L, Gutsell JN, Inzlicht M (2011). Ironic effects of antiprejudice mes-
sages: how motivational interventions can reduce (but also increase)
prejudice. Psychol Sci 22, 1472–1477.

Milkman KL, Akinola M, Chugh D (2015). What happens before? A field experi-
ment exploring how pay and representation differentially shape bias on the
pathway into organizations. J Appl Psychol 100, 1678–1712.

Miller S, Pfund C, Pribbenow CM, Handelsman J (2008). Scientific teaching in
practice. Science 322, 1329–1330.

Moss-Racusin CA, Dovidio JF, Brescoll VL, Graham JM, Handelsman J (2012).
Science faculty’s subtle gender biases favor male students. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 109, 16474–16479.

Moss-Racusin CA, Rudman LA (2010). Disruptions in women’s self-promo-
tion: the backlash avoidance model. Psychol Women Quart 34, 186–
202.

Moss-Racusin CA, van der Toorn J, Dovidio JF, Brescoll VL, Graham MJ,
Handelsman J (2014). Scientific diversity interventions. Science 343,
615–616.

National Science Foundation (NSF) (2008). Thirty-Three Years of Women in
S&E Faculty Positions. www.nsf.gov/statistics/infbrief/nsf08308 (accessed
23 July 2015).

NSF (2012). Women, Minorities, and Persons with Disabilities in Science and
Engineering. www.nsf.gov/statistics/2015/nsf15311/digest/theme2.cfm
(accessed 23 July 2015).

Nature (2015). Sexism has no place in science. Nature 522, 255.

Nobel Foundation (2015). Facts on the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine.
www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/facts/medicine (accessed 23 July 2015).

Nosek BA, Banaji MR, Greenwald AG (2002). Harvesting implicit group atti-
tudes and beliefs from a demonstration web site. Group Dyn Theor Res
6, 101–115.

Paluck EL (2006). Diversity training and intergroup contact: a call to action
research. J Soc Issues 62, 577–595.

Paluck EL, Green DP (2009). Prejudice reduction: what works? A review and
assessment of research and practice. Annu Rev Psychol 60, 339–367.

Pfund C, Miller S, Brenner K, Bruns P, Chang A, Ebert-May D, Fagen AP, Gen-
tile J, Gossens S, Khan IM, et al. (2009). Summer institute to improve uni-
versity science teaching. Science 324, 470–471.

Pfund C, Spencer KC, Asquith P, House SC, Miller S, Sorkness CA (2015).
Building national capacity for research mentor training: an evi-
dence-based approach to training the trainers. CBE Life Sci Educ 14, ar24.

Prime J, Foust-Cummings H, Salib ER, Moss-Racusin CA (2012). Calling All
White Men: Can Training Help Create Inclusive Workplaces? New York:
Catalyst.

Purdie-Vaughns V, Steele CM, Davies PG, Ditlmann R, Crosby JR (2008). So-
cial identity contingencies: how diversity cues signal threat or safety for
African Americans in mainstream institutions. J Pers Soc Psychol 94,
615–630.

Reuben E, Sapienza P, Zingales L (2014). How stereotypes impair women’s
careers in science. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111, 4403–4408.

Rudman LA, Moss-Racusin CA, Glick P, Phelan JE (2012). Reactions to van-
guards: advances in backlash theory. In: Advances in Experimental Social
Psychology, ed. PG Devine and EA Plant, New York: Elsevier, 167–227.

Sheltzer JM, Smith JC (2014). Elite male faculty in the life sciences employ
fewer women. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111, 10107–10221.

Shields SA, Zawadzki MJ, Johnson RN (2011). The impact of a workshop ac-
tivity for gender equity simulation in the academy (WAGES-Academic) in
demonstrating cumulative effects of gender bias. J Divers High Educ 4,
120–129.

Steele CM, Aronson J (1995). Stereotype threat and the intellectual test per-
formance of African Americans. J Pers Soc Psychol 69, 797–811.

Steinpreis RE, Anders KA, Ritzke D (1999). The impact of gender on the
review of the curricula vitae of job applicants and tenure candidates: a
national empirical study. Sex Roles 41, 509–528.

Stout JG, Dasgupta N, Hunsinger M, McManus MA (2011). STEMing the tide:
using ingroup experts to inoculate women’s self-concept in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). J Pers Soc Psychol
100, 255–270.

Swim JK, Aikin K, Hall WS, Hunter BA (1995). Sexism and racism: old-fash-
ioned and modern prejudices. J Pers Soc Psychol 68, 199–214.

Swim JK, Malett R, Russo-Devosa Y, Stangor C (2005). Judgments of sexism:
a comparison of the subtlety of sexism measures and sources of variabil-
ity in judgments of sexism. Psychol Women Q 29, 406–411.

Thomason A (2015). Nobel-winning biochemist apologizes for remarks
about “trouble with girls.” Chronicle of Higher Education. http://chronicle

.com/blogs/ticker/jp/nobel-prize-winning-biochemist-apologizes-for

-remarks-about-trouble-with-girls (accessed 23 July 2015).

Trawalter S, Richeson JA (2006). Regulatory focus and executive function
after interracial interactions. J Exp Soc Psychol 42, 406–412.

Uhlmann EL, Cohen GL (2007). “I think it, therefore it’s true”: effects of
self-perceived objectivity on hiring discrimination. Organ Behav Hum
Dec 104, 207–223.

Van der Lee R, Ellemers N (2015). Gender contributes to personal research fund-
ing success in the Netherlands. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 112, 12349–12353.

Wood WB, Handelsman J (2004). Meeting report: the 2004 National Acade-
mies summer institute on undergraduate education in biology. Cell Biol
Educ 3, 215–217.

Zawadzki MJ, Danube CL, Shields SA (2012). How to talk about gender ineq-
uity in the workplace: using WAGES as an experiential learning tool to
reduce reactance and promote self-efficacy. Sex Roles 67, 605–616.

