                                    A Large-Scale Test of Gender Bias in the Media
                                    Eran Shor,a Arnout van de Rijt,b Babak Fotouhic
                                    a) McGill University; b) Utrecht University; c) Harvard University


                                        Abstract: A large body of studies demonstrates that women continue to receive less media coverage
                                        than men do. Some attribute this difference to gender bias in media reporting—a systematic
                                        inclination toward male subjects. We propose that in order to establish the presence of media bias,
                                        one has to demonstrate that the news coverage of men is disproportional even after accounting for
                                        occupational inequalities and differences in public interest. We examine the coverage of more than
                                        20,000 successful women and men from various social and occupational domains in more than 2,000
                                        news sources as well as web searches for these individuals as a behavioral measure of interest. We
                                        find that when compared with similar-aged men from the same occupational strata, women enjoy
                                        greater public interest yet receive less media coverage.
                                        Keywords: gender; bias; media coverage; computational analysis


                                                 attention is crucial for individuals in various social and occupational
                                    M       EDIA
                                            domains and can have substantial consequences for their success, and even
                                    their well-being (Hooghe, Jacobs, and Claes 2015; Solomon, Soltes, and Sosyura 2014;
                                    Sorensen 2007). Recent studies analyzing large-scale newspaper data sets suggest
                                    that the rise in the share of newspaper coverage focusing on women has recently
                                    almost grounded to a halt (Gallagher 2010; Macharia 2015). The ratio of women
                                    to men in newspaper articles has stabilized around 1:4 (Macharia 2015; Shor et al.
                                    2014b, 2015), whereas the ratio for face images ranges from 1:1.5 to 1:4 (Jia et al. 2016).
                                    We have previously shown (Shor et al. 2015; Shor, van de Rijt, and Miltsov 2019) that
                                    these persistent differences are not primarily the result of gender differences in the
                                    newsroom. When women replace men as newspaper editors or when women reach
Citation: Shor, Eran, Arnout        other key positions in newsrooms, this does not substantially improve women’s
van de Rijt, and Babak Fotouhi.     volume of coverage. However, it remains possible that all reporters and editors,
2019. “A Large-Scale Test of Gen-
der Bias in the Media.” Sociolog-   regardless of gender, subscribe to hegemonic masculine cultural ideologies that
ical Science 6: 526-550.            give preference to men, their interests, and their actions more than those of women
Received: June 6, 2019              (Ridgeway 2013; Ross 2009).
Accepted: June 13, 2019                 Do mainstream media have a coverage bias against women? The answer to this
Published: September 3, 2019        longstanding question is not at all straightforward. Scholars have used the term
Editor(s): Jesper Sørensen, Olav
                                    bias quite liberally when speaking about inequalities in the media coverage of men
Sorenson
DOI: 10.15195/v6.a20
                                    and women in various social and occupational domains (e.g., Cooky, Messner, and
Copyright: c 2019 The Au-           Hextrum 2013; Davis 1982; Eastman and Billings 2000; Falk 2010). In most of these
thor(s). This open-access article   studies, “bias” is used to indicate newsmakers’ tendency to write and publish more
has been published under a Cre-
                                    stories featuring men. However, although a long line of research has unequivocally
ative Commons Attribution Li-
cense, which allows unrestricted    demonstrated that women are much less likely to appear in various media than men
use, distribution and reproduc-     are (see most recently Jia et al. [2016] and Macharia [2015]), we argue that this in
tion, in any form, as long as the
original author and source have     itself does not provide sufficient evidence that coverage of men is disproportionate.
been credited. c b                  At least two alternative explanations must be considered.


                                                                            526
Shor, van de Rijt, and Fotouhi                                                                 Large-Scale Test of Gender Bias


                                     The first alternative explanation for gender differences in news coverage is
                                 occupational inequalities. Studies have repeatedly shown the dominant presence of
                                 men in various social and employment categories. Men are more likely both to enter
                                 occupations and social domains that receive greater media attention and to hold
                                 the most senior, powerful, and prestigious positions in these domains (England
                                 2005, 2010). It naturally follows that mainstream media report more on men than
                                 on women. In order to claim that the media have a quantitative coverage bias
                                 against women, one must first demonstrate that women remain less likely to garner
                                 media attention when compared with men with similarly prominent positions and
                                 achievements.
                                     Second, inequalities in coverage might reflect disproportionate public interest in
                                 men. This may be because of audiences’ preferences for news about men or because
                                 men may generate greater interest by engaging in behaviors the public finds more
                                 newsworthy. For example, it may be that the average male presidential candidate
                                 produces more surprising or outrageous comments and scandals on a daily basis,
                                 leading audiences to be more interested in reading about these statements and
                                 occurrences. Whatever the reason for differential interest, media organizations and
                                 newsmakers may simply tailor to it without having a clear preference of their own.
                                 Hence, in order to claim that media are biased against the coverage of women, one
                                 would have to show not only that the average woman receives fewer mentions but
                                 also that the public is not more interested in her male colleague.
                                     In the current article, we assess whether mainstream media indeed show an
                                 inclination toward the coverage of men even when accounting for equivalent struc-
                                 tural positions and for public interest. We seek to address the following three
                                 research questions: (1) Do women receive less coverage than men even when they
                                 have reached equivalent positions or achievements in politics, the business world,
                                 entertainment, sports, and other social and occupational spheres? (2) Does public
                                 interest in men and women who have reached such similar positions differ? And
                                 (3) do women receive less media attention than comparable men even after taking
                                 into account both their structural positioning and the public interest they attract?


                                  Why Might Successful Women Receive Less Coverage
                                  Compared With Successful Men? Causal Mechanisms
                                  and Research Hypotheses
                                  Below, we consider three major approaches to explaining gender inequalities in
                                  coverage. Our discussion is informed by insights from the literatures on workforce
                                  inequalities and gender pay gaps. We maintain that inequalities in the media
                                  coverage of men and women may be attributed primarily to one of three major
                                  classes of explanations: (1) real-world structural inequalities, (2) unequal public
                                  interest, and (3) media-related inequalities, such as newsmaker predispositions and
                                  unequal access/response to reporters.




sociological science | www.sociologicalscience.com           527                                 September 2019 | Volume 6
Shor, van de Rijt, and Fotouhi                                                                   Large-Scale Test of Gender Bias


                                  Structural Inequalities in the Workforce and in High-Profile Positions
                                 One potentially powerful explanation for women’s coverage volume disadvantage
                                 is that men are more likely to (1) enter occupations and domains that receive greater
                                 media attention and (2) hold the most senior, powerful, and prestigious positions in
                                 these domains.
                                     Research by sociologists and economists on labor market segmentation (Leicht
                                 2008) highlights the differential entry of women and men into fields such as politics,
                                 business, the security forces, and other high-profile professions and fields (e.g.,
                                 movie directors, musical producers, and songwriters in the entertainment industry).
                                 This literature highlights barriers such as direct discrimination in hiring decisions
                                 by employers (England 1992), differential recruitment practices often relying on
                                 personal gendered networks (Fernandez and Sosa 2005; Folke and Rickne 2016;
                                 Morgan 1998), and powerful cultural stereotypes about the types of jobs that women
                                 are able or unable to perform or master (England 2010; England and Li 2006; Reskin
                                 2003; Reskin and Bielby 2005). Scholars have also highlighted cultural beliefs and
                                 educational ideologies, which operate to direct women into the domestic sphere or
                                 into professions with lower visibility and pay (Correll 2004). As a result, women are
                                 often channeled or select themselves into social and occupational spheres that, ac-
                                 cording to most journalistic standards, are less newsworthy (England 2005; England
                                 and Li 2006)
                                     Within jobs, numerous studies have demonstrated that women often face a
                                 “glass ceiling,” where their progress in the workforce, in politics, and in other pro-
                                 fessional and public domains is hindered by persistent institutional structures and
                                 cultural ideologies (Cotter et al. 2001; Folke and Rickne 2016; Kay and Hagan 1995;
                                 Ridgeway 2011). This glass ceiling becomes increasingly rigid and impermeable
                                 the higher up women move in a given hierarchy (Marx Feree and Purkayastha
                                 2000). To illustrate, although women have been increasingly successful at attaining
                                 political positions in the United States, the large majority of the most senior political
                                 positions (such as presidents, senators, Army generals, and Supreme Court justices)
                                 are still occupied by men.
                                     Given the strength and persistence of glass ceiling effects in various domains,
                                 one might argue that journalists have no choice but to report on men more than they
                                 do on women if they are to cover those events that involve successful politicians,
                                 businesspeople, and entertainers. Much of the advantage in coverage volume that
                                 men enjoy in the media may thus be ascribed to real-world structural inequalities
                                 that disadvantage women. However, it remains unclear whether such real-world
                                 inequalities, by themselves, are powerful enough to account for the entire difference
                                 in the coverage volume of men and women. One way to begin examining this is to
                                 compare only women and men who hold specific equivalent structural positions or
                                 achievements, in particular, high-profile positions such as state senators (politics),
                                 company founders (business), Oscar winners (entertainment), and Olympic medal
                                 winners (sports). If men still hold a coverage advantage even when compared
                                 with women in equivalent occupations and similar achievements, then coverage
                                 differentials are not entirely due to structural inequalities.




sociological science | www.sociologicalscience.com            528                                   September 2019 | Volume 6
Shor, van de Rijt, and Fotouhi                                                                 Large-Scale Test of Gender Bias


                                         Hypothesis 1: Women receive less media coverage than men do within
                                         the same occupations and structural positions.


                                  Inequalities in Public Interest and Newsworthiness for
                                  Equivalent Positions
                                 We next propose that even a systematic comparison of men and women who
                                 have reached equivalent positions in various social and occupational subdomains
                                 remains insufficient, as it is also important to account for public interest. Popular
                                 media outlets do not operate in a vacuum; they need to consider readership and
                                 viewership ratings and they face commercial concerns and constraints. Journalists
                                 and editors often ask themselves whether a given individual is of sufficient public
                                 interest to merit coverage; that is, to what extent are readers and viewers interested
                                 in knowing more about this individual? We may therefore ask: are there systematic
                                 differences in public interest between men and women with equivalent notable
                                 positions?
                                     The literature on gender inequalities, particularly in the workplace, offers a
                                 number of mechanisms through which gender may interact with public interest
                                 and shape it. On the one hand, one might argue that women who have succeeded
                                 in reaching high-end social and professional positions might attract more interest
                                 when compared with their male counterparts. First, these women are simply rarer
                                 and therefore might be perceived as more “exotic,” making for an interesting jour-
                                 nalistic story. Second, it may be that the women themselves had to be more talented,
                                 ambitious, and hardworking than men in order for them to overcome institutional
                                 barriers. For example, Folke and Rickne (2016) argue that given the stringent selec-
                                 tion and promotion processes that women face in politics, those women who remain
                                 in the pool of potential candidates for promotion are likely to be more qualified
                                 than their male counterparts. Supporting this premise, recent research suggests
                                 that those women who make it into leading executive positions in the business
                                 world offer unique advantages to their firms, including an improvement in firm
                                 performance (Khan and Vieito 2013; Weber and Zulehner 2010). In other words,
                                 those women who manage to reach high-level occupational positions in the face of
                                 well-documented barriers and discrimination are likely to be exceptionally talented
                                 individuals. They often possess remarkable skills and charisma, which, in turn,
                                 might make them particularly newsworthy.
                                     On the other hand, a long tradition of feminist and gender theory suggests
                                 that women might in fact attract less public interest even when they do reach
                                 leading social and professional positions. Some scholars (Fiske 2011; Lamont 2012;
                                 Ridgeway 2013; Ridgeway et al. 2009) have emphasized the role of status and
                                 cultural beliefs in maintaining gender and racial inequalities. Entrenched cultural
                                 beliefs about social categories and the types of individuals who deserve special
                                 respect shape people’s expectations of themselves and of others. Groups that enjoy
                                 greater resources to begin with (e.g., men and whites) are perceived as better—more
                                 capable, competent, and interesting. As these beliefs are shared by dominants and
                                 subdominants alike, they institutionalize and become both legitimate and prevalent.
                                 Gender status beliefs advantage men simply because they are men, not because



sociological science | www.sociologicalscience.com           529                                 September 2019 | Volume 6
Shor, van de Rijt, and Fotouhi                                                                 Large-Scale Test of Gender Bias


                                 they have more merit, resources, or power. They thus give men an advantage
                                 over women in similar positions who are just as talented, successful, or powerful.
                                 These men are perceived as more competent, interesting, and worthy of both their
                                 positions and public attention.
                                     The literature on labor inequalities and pay gaps further provides a set of mech-
                                 anisms for explaining gendered differences in public interest. These mechanisms all
                                 suggest that women remain of lesser public interest even when reaching high-end
                                 positions in the business world, in politics, and in arts, sports, and entertainment.
                                 Among them are (1) differential assignments to internal positions and tasks, (2)
                                 potentially shorter careers or durations of occupying prominent offices, and (3)
                                 culturally influenced styles of communication and self-promotion. We explore these
                                 mechanisms below.
                                     In terms of differential assignment, a body of literature suggests that women
                                 and men are differentially slotted into positions and tasks within organizations.
                                 Women tend to receive inferior work assignments, which are less challenging and
                                 complex and entail less authority and work responsibilities and lower visibility
                                 (Madden 2012; Kanter 1977; Kay 1998; Reskin and Bielby 2005; Smith 2002). Even
                                 when women do enter prestigious professions or reach high-end positions in these
                                 professions, they often have shorter career spans. Women and minorities are more
                                 likely to be promoted to precarious leadership positions, with higher turnover rates
                                 and professional instability, a phenomenon that some have referred to as a “glass
                                 cliff” (Cook and Glass 2013; Ryan and Haslam 2005). Consequently, the time women
                                 spend in publicly visible offices, which attract media attention, is shorter relative
                                 to that of their male counterparts who have reached a similar office. Women are
                                 also more likely to take parental leaves and work part-time and flexible hours in
                                 order to spend more time with their families (Budig and England 2001; Glass and
                                 Camarigg 1992; Sanchez and Thomson 1997). This hurts their hiring and promotion
                                 chances but also takes them away for extended periods from positions that are in
                                 the public eye and attract media attention.
                                     Finally, some scholars have suggested that even those women who reach high-
                                 end positions may be less competitive, ambitious, confident, assertive, or self-
                                 promoting when compared with similarly positioned men (Castagnetti and Rosti
                                 2013; Fox and Lawless 2014; Manning and Saidi 2010). Years of gendered socializa-
                                 tion and prevailing gendered social norms and status beliefs have taught women to
                                 remain modest and refrain from bragging about their achievements or deliberately
                                 putting themselves in the limelight. Consequently, even when women do reach elite
                                 social and occupational positions, they are more likely to maintain their privacy
                                 and are reluctant to put themselves forward and actively seek public attention.
                                 Without extensive self-promotion, the public is likely to judge these women as
                                 less interesting and worthy of attention (Ridgeway 2013). This final mechanism is
                                 especially relevant to social and occupational fields such as the arts, entertainment,
                                 and athletics, where organizational hierarchies and inequalities might play a lesser
                                 role in determining public interest.
                                     Taken together, these various mechanisms suggest that even when women do
                                 reach high-end structural positions they may still be considered less interesting
                                 than men who have reached similar positions. We therefore propose the following:



sociological science | www.sociologicalscience.com           530                                 September 2019 | Volume 6
Shor, van de Rijt, and Fotouhi                                                                  Large-Scale Test of Gender Bias


                                         Hypothesis 2: Women attract less public interest than men do within
                                         the same occupations and structural positions.


                                  Media-Related Factors: Bias and Discrimination in Media Coverage
                                 The literature on gendered pay gaps often concludes that when these gaps persist
                                 after accounting for work profiles, opportunity structures, and human capital, they
                                 may be understood as resulting from wage discrimination (Castagnetti and Rosti
                                 2013; Dinovitzer, Reichman, and Sterling 2009). That is, any difference not due to
                                 productivity-relevant personal attributes may be considered as due to bias. We
                                 wish to extend this logic to gendered media inequalities and suggest that those
                                 differences that cannot be ascribed to either structural inequalities or differences in
                                 public interest can reasonably be understood as gender bias.
                                     As is the case with biases in public interest, media coverage bias might either
                                 favor or disfavor women. On the one hand, journalists and editors may practice
                                 tokenism, celebrating the success of women and seeking to show that women
                                 can really make it and provide future role models for young girls. Consequently,
                                 journalists may actively seek stories on women who made it to the top and write
                                 about them. Others may want to highlight women’s successes and accomplishments
                                 simply in order to prove that they are not biased against women. Journalists
                                 and editors are frequently sensitive to criticisms from academics and the public
                                 regarding the status of women in the media and may be motivated to show that
                                 they promote women’s coverage whenever possible.
                                     On the other hand, literature on gender inequalities, which we reviewed in
                                 the previous section, is also relevant to understanding the media’s treatment of
                                 women. In particular, Ridgeway (2011, 2013), Ridgeway and Correll (2004), and
                                 Ridgeway et al. (2009) argue that status biases affect individuals’ willingness to
                                 pay attention to women and positively evaluate their actions, words, efforts, and
                                 accomplishments: “The same idea ‘sounds better’ coming from the advantaged than
                                 from the disadvantaged” (Ridgeway 2013:6). As processes of status entrenchment
                                 accumulate and hierarchies of influence and prominence become binding social
                                 structures, men are “revealed to be simply ‘better’ at valued social tasks than are
                                 women” (Ridgeway 2013:6). Ridgeway further argues that we are rarely aware
                                 of how we are all implicit in the production of gender statuses. We habitually
                                 make judgments about who is better and more deserving of resources and attention
                                 without consciously thinking about these judgments or acknowledging them.
                                     Mass communication scholars make similar arguments, maintaining that the
                                 differential media coverage of women and men is not merely a reflection of existing
                                 gender inequities in the public sphere or differential public interest. Rather, media
                                 practices significantly exacerbate and artificially magnify these inequalities (De
                                 Swert and Hooghe 2010; Tuchman 1979). The daily choices of journalists, editors,
                                 and publishers working in a masculine cultural environment contribute to the
                                 aggravation of coverage imbalances and skew coverage patterns in favor of men.
                                 Consequently, even women who do manage to reach high-level positions often fail
                                 to receive the same degree of coverage as their male counterparts. The historical
                                 dominance of men in editorial positions has created a power structure, dictating



sociological science | www.sociologicalscience.com           531                                  September 2019 | Volume 6
Shor, van de Rijt, and Fotouhi                                                                 Large-Scale Test of Gender Bias


                                 masculine coverage and editorial norms, which favor issues associated with men,
                                 their actions, and their preferences, while at the same time treating these norms as
                                 objective professional routines (Mills 1997; Rodgers and Thorson 2003; Ross and
                                 Carter 2011).
                                     Anecdotal evidence suggests that women may indeed receive reduced media
                                 attention when compared with men even when they do reach positions of power
                                 and prestige. Most of the previous relevant research has focused on the fields of
                                 politics and sports. In politics, studies that analyzed the coverage of women running
                                 for office in the United States reported mixed results. Falk (2010), who followed nine
                                 presidential campaigns, reported that women received consistently less campaign
                                 coverage and issue attention than their male counterparts. Similarly, Heldman,
                                 Carroll, and Olson (2005), who examined Elizabeth Dole’s presidential campaign,
                                 reported that she did not receive an amount of media coverage consistent with her
                                 standing as the number two candidate in the polls. Other studies, however, failed to
                                 confirm these tendencies. Studies on mayoral candidates (Atkeson and Krebs 2008),
                                 candidates for the House of Representatives (Lavery 2013), and candidates for state
                                 senators or governors (Smith 1997) found no substantial differences between the
                                 coverage volume of male and female candidates. Other recent studies have even
                                 reported that women running for senatorial, gubernatorial, and vice presidential
                                 offices in the 2000s received more coverage when compared with their male co-
                                 runners (Robertson et al. 2009; Wasburn and Wasburn 2011). Conversely, in the most
                                 extensive and carefully controlled analysis to date, Hooghe et al. (2015) examined
                                 the television coverage of 493 Belgian members of parliament (MPs). They found
                                 that even after controlling for members’ age and specific political position (men
                                 tend to hold more senior positions), female MPs were significantly less likely to be
                                 allotted speaking time in news broadcasts.
                                     Sports is a relatively unique field, as male and female sports are segregated
                                 at both the amateur and the professional levels. Thus, a comparison of similarly
                                 equivalent positions is somewhat more challenging. Still, research on coverage
                                 differentials between female and male sports and athletes found that between 90
                                 percent and 95 percent of all articles in various media were on male athletes or
                                 men’s sports (Cooky et al. 2013). Yet, we are unaware of any systematic large-scale
                                 analyses that compared the coverage volume for a large number of men and women
                                 with a similar status or with similar achievements (e.g., Olympic gold medalists or
                                 winners of tennis Grand Slam competitions).
                                     Although the studies reviewed above are informative and instructive, they share
                                 a number of shortcomings, which are addressed by the present study. First, most
                                 of them have examined the coverage in a single domain (e.g., sports), relying on
                                 a small sample of individuals and media outlets. Such research designs render
                                 generalizations problematic and increase the risk for anecdotal and subjective
                                 evaluations. Second, these studies did not empirically substantiate the common
                                 conclusion about gender coverage bias in the media. This term is employed quite
                                 loosely when talking about gender differences in media coverage (Cooky et al. 2013;
                                 Davis 1982; Eastman and Billings 2000; Falk 2010) but mostly without evidence for
                                 a clear preference for men over women who have reached similar positions and
                                 achievements. Finally, as we argue above, it is not enough to simply compare the



sociological science | www.sociologicalscience.com           532                                 September 2019 | Volume 6
Shor, van de Rijt, and Fotouhi                                                                Large-Scale Test of Gender Bias


                                 volume of coverage for women and men who have reached equivalent positions
                                 or achievements. To begin demonstrating media bias, one has to, at the very least,
                                 also account for public interest and show that the media fail to cater to what media
                                 consumers wish to read or hear about (even while recognizing that these interests
                                 themselves are socially constructed). In other words, the mere existence of coverage
                                 inequalities among individuals from different social groups does not constitute
                                 evidence for media bias because it may be justified by journalistic professional
                                 standards and/or by commercial considerations. In the current study, we will
                                 therefore examine media inequalities in coverage (supply) while accounting for
                                 both structural inequalities and public interest (demand). That is, we test the
                                 following proposition:

                                         Hypothesis 3: When compared with men who (1) have reached the same
                                         achievements or occupational positions and (2) draw similar public
                                         interest, women receive less media coverage.


                                  Sampling, Data, and Measurements
                                  Sampling Individual Names by Domain
                                 In order to obtain a large and systematic sample of names, we collected data from
                                 Wikipedia category databases (see https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Cate-
                                 gorization). We first constructed an initial list of larger social and occupational
                                 domains based on common newspaper categorizations. These include politics,
                                 business, entertainment, sports, and arts/literature. We then devised a sublist of
                                 prominent subdomains within each of these larger domains. For example, within
                                 the domain of entertainment, we outlined the following subcategories: actors (TV
                                 and film), directors, singers, and dancers. In some domains, we also identified more
                                 specific subcategories, ones in which individuals are particularly likely to attract
                                 media attention (e.g., Oscar nominees or Pulitzer Prize winners).
                                     We next turned to the Wikipedia category database, which includes extensive
                                 lists of both female and male individuals in most of the domains and subdomains
                                 that we preidentified. For example, to assemble our list of singers, we extracted
                                 all 1,535 names appearing under the category “American female singers” and all
                                 2,046 names appearing under the category “American male singers.” In some
                                 cases, there was no specific category for men (e.g., for chief executives). In such
                                 cases, we extracted all the names from the general category (e.g., “American chief
                                 executives”) and then eliminated from the list names that already appeared on
                                 the specific category for women (“American women chief executives”). We next
                                 manually validated that the remaining names all belonged to men. Although the
                                 Wikipedia lists were not (and could not be) complete for most categories (e.g.,
                                 singers), they were complete for others, such as U.S. senators, Oscar nominees,
                                 billionaires, and tennis Grand Slam winners. Moreover, even when the lists were
                                 incomplete, they were mostly extensive and included the majority of the well-
                                 known men and women in each subdomain.
                                     Altogether, we assembled an initial database containing the names of 26,281
                                 men and 12,372 women. Seeking to account for potential imbalances between the


sociological science | www.sociologicalscience.com           533                                September 2019 | Volume 6
Shor, van de Rijt, and Fotouhi                                                                 Large-Scale Test of Gender Bias


                                 ways that lists of men and women were collected in each domain and subdomain,
                                 we then constructed a smaller matched-pairs balanced data set by applying the
                                 following matching rules. First, as our coverage data come from the first decade of
                                 the new millennium, we eliminated all names of individuals born prior to 1920, as
                                 these were much less likely to appear in recent news. This truncation of data is also
                                 justified given the sharp imbalance between women and men born before 1920 in
                                 our various domains. Many of the subdomains included no women born prior to
                                 that year.
                                     Second, because almost all the Wikipedia categories included more male names
                                 than female names, we paired each woman with a man from her specific subdomain
                                 (e.g., a female U.S. senator with a male U.S. senator) using their year of birth. When
                                 there was more than one same-aged man, we calculated the median of Wikipedia
                                 page views among these men during the period for which we have media coverage
                                 data and then selected one man whose page views numbers were the closest to
                                 this median value. We allowed for no more than a 10-year difference between a
                                 man and a woman in each of the matched pairs. Applying this matching rationale
                                 attends to imbalances in times of activity and public visibility. The average age of
                                 men in our preliminary sample was higher than that of women, as most women
                                 only entered various social and occupational fields in later years. For example,
                                 although professional male basketball in the United States has existed since the
                                 1940s, a professional female league was only established in 1996. Such differences
                                 skew assessments of relative coverage, as older individuals in fields like sports,
                                 entertainment, or the arts were more likely to be retired and less likely to be active
                                 by the first decade of the new millennium. In our final matched sample, 99.8
                                 percent of the pairs have an age difference of two years of less, and the maximum
                                 age difference is four years.
                                     Finally, in our concluding analysis, we sought to account for public interest, as
                                 previous research has shown that women may need greater levels of public interest
                                 to be included in Wikipedia (Skiena and Ward 2013). We therefore paired each
                                 woman with a man from the same subdomain who (1) was no more than 10 years
                                 apart from that woman (e.g., Susan Collins was born in 1952; Lindsey Graham was
                                 born in 1955) and (2) who had the closest number of Wikipedia page views in the
                                 period 2004 to 2009, for which we have daily media coverage data1 (e.g., Senator
                                 Susan Collins, who had a median number of 9,203.5 monthly page views was
                                 matched with Senator Lindsey Graham, who had a median number of 9,313 page
                                 views). To maximize comparability, whenever we could not find a match with no
                                 more than a 10-year age difference and no more than a 10 percent difference in page
                                 views, we omitted the pairing in question from the final analysis. In Appendix 1 of
                                 our online supplement, we present the full list of matched pairs for the subcategory
                                 of senators. Appendix 1 of the online supplement shows that in almost all cases
                                 we were able to reach very good matches, both in terms of Wikipedia page views
                                 (typically, no more than a 2 percent difference in number of views) and in terms of
                                 age (typically, no more than a five-year age difference).
                                     Overall, we were able to successfully pair 10,470 women with 10,470 men for a
                                 total sample of 20,940 individuals appearing in the Wikipedia categories. Table 1




sociological science | www.sociologicalscience.com           534                                 September 2019 | Volume 6
Shor, van de Rijt, and Fotouhi                                                                  Large-Scale Test of Gender Bias


                                  details the full distribution and the number of matched pairs in each field and
                                  subfield.


                                  Media Coverage
                                 Our measure of media coverage relies on data collected by the Lydia news analysis
                                 system (Bautin et al. 2010; Shor et al. 2014a; van de Rijt et al. 2013). Lydia
                                 provides time-stamped records of occurrences of person names in the scanned
                                 and digital records of more than 2,000 newspapers, magazines, and online news
                                 sources (most of them American) between 2004 and 2009, after which most online
                                 newspapers placed most of their content behind paywalls. This timeframe offered a
                                 unique opportunity to access unprecedented amounts of data from a very large and
                                 highly diverse number of news sources. These sources include both large national
                                 newspapers and smaller local ones as well as weekly magazines and online websites
                                 of major TV news stations and several prominent news websites, portals, and blogs.
                                     One possible challenge to the validity of our analysis is common names. Our
                                 count of newspapers’ mentions is unable to distinguish between two individuals
                                 with the same name. This problem would be particularly salient if common names
                                 were not evenly distributed among men and women (which is certainly possible).
                                 To tackle this problem of common names, we excluded from the analyses presented
                                 in this article all names that appeared in the Wikipedia categories followed by
                                 parentheses. Most often, such parentheses are used for individuals with a common
                                 name, where Wikipedia contains multiple web pages, one for each of these individ-
                                 uals. For example, the name “Daniel Levy” has six different Wikipedia pages, each
                                 marked with a parenthesis after the name that notes the individuals’ profession
                                 or affiliation: politician, businessman, political analyst, TV personality, classical
                                 pianist, and sociologist (not a co-author).


                                  Public Interest
                                 We argue that attempting to measure media bias by comparing apparently equiv-
                                 alent social and structural positions is insufficient. Such a strategy fails to fully
                                 capture the role of personal charisma, individual achievements, gendered cultural
                                 norms about self-promotion, and gendered differential public interest within do-
                                 mains. As these traits are not randomly distributed between men and women,
                                 accounting for public interest becomes a crucial step in trying to assess gendered
                                 media bias. In Appendix 2 of the online supplement, we demonstrate the im-
                                 portance of accounting for public interest and the dangers involved in ignoring
                                 it.
                                     Wikipedia page views (“hits”) as a measure of public interest. Search engine queries
                                 on computers and smartphones are a dominant expression of public interest. When
                                 people are interested in and wish to know more about a politician, artist, or busi-
                                 nessperson, they type his or her name in a search engine. This makes name queries
                                 a promising measure of public interest. Unfortunately, most major search engines
                                 restrict access to longitudinal records of search queries, making it impossible to ob-
                                 tain such quantities for large volumes of names within a reasonable amount of time.
                                 However, when querying names of well-known individuals, their Wikipedia page


sociological science | www.sociologicalscience.com            535                                  September 2019 | Volume 6
Shor, van de Rijt, and Fotouhi                                                                    Large-Scale Test of Gender Bias



Table 1: News coverage: article mentions of age-matched women and men in selected categories (yearly
medians, 2004–2009).
                                                                                                   Relative coverage
                                                                              Coverage: median     (women vs. men)
                                                               Number of         number of         and bootstrap tests
                                                                 matched         newspaper         of difference (95%
Category                         Subcategory                        pairs     mentions per year    confidence intervals)
                                                                              Women       Men
All categories                   All names                           10,470      301       385     0.78 (0.73–0.83) †

Entertainment (U.S.)             All entertainers                     5,904       265       386    0.69 (0.64–0.75) †
                                 Film actors                          3,908       301       432    0.70 (0.62–0.78)†
                                 Television actors                    3,916       281       391    0.72 (0.64–0.79)†
                                 Film directors                         233       705       617    1.14 (0.78–1.92)
                                 Singers                              1,097       325       578    0.56 (0.47–0.68)†
                                 Pop singers                            219     2,697       952    2.83 (1.92–4.64)†
                                 Dancers                                169     1,042       454    2.30 (1.35–3.37)†
                                 Television personalities               353       577       717    0.80 (0.56–1.15)
                                 Radio personalities                    103       232       385    0.60 (0.35–1.08)
                                 Oscar nominees                         230    10,393    17,547    0.59 (0.44–0.78)†
                                 Emmy nominees                          145     3,331     6,751    0.49 (0.36–0.82)

Politics (U.S.)                  All politicians                       828        531     2,635    0.20 (0.16–0.25)†
                                 Governors                              24      7,656     9,302    0.82 (0.18–9.47)
                                 Mayors                                112        761       757    1.01 (0.62–1.84)
                                 Cabinet secretaries                    21      8,825    23,392    0.38 (0.06–1.58)
                                 Presidential candidates                41      1,385    23,634    0.06 (0.01–0.19)†
                                 Judges                                135        959       244    3.93 (2.60–5.71)†
                                 House representatives                 150      5,262    10,268    0.51 (0.36–0.67)†
                                 Senators                               30     37,344    48,696    0.77 (0.34–1.13)

Business (U.S.)                  All businesspeople                    252        691       506    1.37 (0.87–2.07)
                                 Chief executives                       99        870       622    1.40 (0.61–2.34)
                                 Business executives                    40      1,645       572    2.88 (1.04–7.99)†
                                 Company founders                       16      4,911       275    17.89 (1.91–113.39)∗
                                 Billionaires                           26      1,012     1,326    0.76 (0.17–1.68)

Sports                           All athletes                         1,051     1,263     2,033    0.62 (0.52–0.78)†
                                 Tennis Grand Slam champions             59     6,807     5,186    1.31 (0.46–3.72)
                                 (all nations)
                                 Soccer players (U.S.)                 121        339     2,551    0.13 (0.08–0.17)†
                                 Basketball players (U.S.)             337      2,258     4,551    0.50 (0.38–0.75)†
                                 Golf players (U.S.)                   294        926     1,107    0.84 (0.54–1.19)
                                 Olympic athletes (U.S.)               176      2,001     3,224    0.62 (0.48–0.95)∗

Arts and literature              All artists and writers              1,392       232       225    1.03 (0.85–1.17)
                                 Painters                               158        71        49    1.46 (0.78–2.35)
                                 Photographers                          237       155       202    0.77 (0.57–1.11)
                                 Sculptors                               74       120        99    1.21 (0.53–1.98)
                                 Writers                                874       319       366    0.87 (0.67–1.08)
                                 Pulitzer Prize winners                  50     1,211     1,547    0.78 (0.39–1.49)
∗p   < 0.05, † p < 0.01



sociological science | www.sociologicalscience.com             536                                  September 2019 | Volume 6
Shor, van de Rijt, and Fotouhi                                                                 Large-Scale Test of Gender Bias


                                 almost always comes up as one of the first-listed search results. Indeed, Yoshida
                                 et al. (2015) found that search figures obtained from Google Trends (a measure
                                 of how often a particular search term is entered into the Google search engine)
                                 correlated very strongly with Wikipedia page views (r = 0.92). Appendix 3 of the
                                 online supplement shows this relationship for the name “Anne Hathaway.” Our
                                 own smaller-scale comparison of Google search results and Wikipedia page views
                                 revealed a similar resemblance. Unlike search queries, the frequencies of Wikipedia
                                 page views are publicly available, unrestricted, and free. Therefore, we use this
                                 measure as a powerful proxy for public interest in all names in our sample.2
                                     Although the relative frequency of Wikipedia page views is by no means a
                                 flawless measure of public interest (we discuss some of its limitations below), it
                                 nevertheless provides several important advantages when assessing public interest
                                 and, consequently, media bias. First, by using this behavioral measure, we allow
                                 the public’s revealed preferences to determine which figures are more interesting
                                 or newsworthy. Indeed, when looking only at more conventional measures of
                                 “importance,” such as reaching a certain structural position (e.g., governor) or a
                                 tangible achievement (e.g., winning certain prizes or breaking an athletic record),
                                 one runs the danger of overemphasizing criteria that may have little to do with
                                 public preferences and tastes.
                                     A second important advantage of using Wikipedia page views as a measure of
                                 interest is that it accounts, at least in part, for some of the unmeasured differences
                                 and inequalities between men and women, which we discussed in our review
                                 of the labor market and gender pay gap literature. Consider, for example, the
                                 proposition that women are often assigned roles and tasks of lesser importance and
                                 lower visibility in organizations. Whenever that is the case, we would expect these
                                 women to also draw lesser public interest, be queried for less in search engines, and
                                 be looked up on Wikipedia less frequently. Similarly, if women suffer from greater
                                 professional instability and turnover rates once they reach high-end positions, and
                                 consequently spend less time in the office compared with male colleagues, then
                                 this should be reflected in reduced public interest in these women once they exit
                                 the position. Finally, even the suggested differences in competitiveness and self-
                                 promoting efforts between men and women should be reflected in our measure
                                 of interest. If women as a group are indeed less self-promoting and do not make
                                 egregious statements or highlight their abilities and achievements to the same
                                 degree as their male counterparts, then it may reasonably follow that the public
                                 would be less interested in them and would be less likely to search for their names
                                 in Wikipedia.
                                     Finally, the Wikipedia page views measure exhibits both face validity and crite-
                                 rion validity. Scholars commonly agree that the number of web searches reflects
                                 the degree of public interest in the subject matter or individual (Nghiem et al. 2016;
                                 Ripberger 2011; Yoshida et al. 2015). According to Yoshida et al. (2015), at least for
                                 high-frequency keywords, Wikipedia page views serve as an effective resource for
                                 simulating web search trends and, consequently, public attentiveness and interest.
                                     As a measure of public interest, Wikipedia page views also have some disadvan-
                                 tages. First, there is no complete overlap between those people who surf the Internet
                                 and newspapers’ readership. For example, the former may tend to be younger, as



sociological science | www.sociologicalscience.com           537                                 September 2019 | Volume 6
Shor, van de Rijt, and Fotouhi                                                                 Large-Scale Test of Gender Bias


                                 they are likely to have computer and Internet skills, whereas a larger portion of
                                 the latter may be relatively older. Still, one may assume that both Wikipedia users
                                 and newspapers readers are relatively more educated (people who read) and that
                                 they are less likely to be poor, as indicated by their access to the Internet (to both
                                 Wikipedia and online newspapers) and/or their ability to subscribe to newspapers.
                                 In fact, we find no reason to assume that Wikipedia users and newspaper readers are
                                 two very different populations with very different tastes and interests. Furthermore,
                                 as we note above, we contend that Wikipedia queries are a good estimate of general
                                 public interest, regardless of the overlap between the populations of Internet users
                                 and newspaper readers.
                                     A second drawback of Wikipedia page views, one that it shares with any other
                                 reasonable measure of public interest, is that it is informed by media coverage itself
                                 (Gans 1979; McCombs and Shaw 1972). Media coverage not only reflects but also
                                 shapes public interest. When newspapers and other media frequently mention
                                 certain individuals, media consumers would be more likely to search for these
                                 individuals online (including on Wikipedia). Indeed, the spike shown in Appendix
                                 3 of the online supplement occurs on the day of a television broadcast on a movie
                                 in which Anne Hathaway played a major role. Conversely, journalists and editors
                                 are often sensitive to public interests and would be more likely to write about
                                 those individuals who receive higher online traffic (e.g., through name searches on
                                 various websites). It may even be that search engines are more likely to route users
                                 to Wikipedia pages of names that appear more prominently in mass media.
                                     This partial codeterminacy of interest and coverage means that search queries
                                 and page views are measures of actual public interest, not of what public interest
                                 would have looked like in the absence of the agenda-setting effects of media cover-
                                 age. This, in turn, means that its use leads to more conservative estimates of actual
                                 media coverage differentials. That is, because of the interdependency of various
                                 media, we might expect a strong correlation between the two measures. Therefore,
                                 our estimations of gendered coverage differentials in the news when controlling for
                                 Wikipedia page views are likely to be downwardly inclined. Hence, any residual
                                 discrepancy in favor of men (or in favor of women) should be interpreted as a con-
                                 servative underestimate. There is an interesting parallel here with gender wage-gap
                                 measures, which are similarly conservative because they fail to account for profile
                                 differences between women and men generated by prior discrimination.
                                     Finally, Internet users reach Wikipedia pages not only through direct searches
                                 but also through other means, such as by following links from other Wikipedia
                                 pages. These links may be organized in ways that give preference to certain groups
                                 of individuals. For example, it may be that when reading on a certain male basket-
                                 ball player, one is led to other male basketball players through hyperlinks, leading
                                 to greater traffic on those neighboring pages. To the extent that this trend sys-
                                 tematically favors men, due to their overall higher presence on Wikipedia, we
                                 might therefore expect that our Wikipedia measure of interest will overestimate
                                 public interest in male figures. This would therefore also render estimates of gender
                                 coverage gaps downwardly biased.
                                     Although cognizant of these potential shortcomings, we wish to reemphasize the
                                 very strong correlation between Wikipedia page views and Google search results,



sociological science | www.sociologicalscience.com           538                                 September 2019 | Volume 6
Shor, van de Rijt, and Fotouhi                                                                  Large-Scale Test of Gender Bias


                                 which gives us confidence that this is a powerful proxy of public interest, the only
                                 one readily available to researchers on such a large scale.


                                  Findings
                                  Domain-Stratified Media Supply
                                 To test Hypothesis 1, we calculated ratios for the relative coverage of men and
                                 women in our sample. We first stratified the analyses by domain (e.g., entertainment,
                                 politics, and sports) and by subdomain (e.g., dancers or Olympians) so as to be able
                                 to compare men and women with equivalent structural positions or achievements
                                 and matched pairs of men and women by age. In Table 1, we present the number
                                 of matched pairs in each domain and subdomain (column 3), the median number
                                 of newspaper mentions for women and for men (columns 4 and 5, respectively),
                                 and the results (odds ratios) of permutation tests for gender differences in supply
                                 (column 6). The nonparametric bootstrap test3 assesses whether the difference
                                 in the median coverage of women and men is statistically significant. Note that
                                 because of the relatively small numbers of names in some of the subcategories,
                                 reported tests may suffer from low statistical power.4
                                     The results presented in Table 1 provide substantial support for our first hy-
                                 pothesis, stating that women receive less media coverage compared with men who
                                 have reached similar achievements or structural positions. First, an examination of
                                 the entire set of matched pairs in our sample (representing 20,940 individuals in
                                 10,470 matched pairs) reveals a large and statistically significant coverage advan-
                                 tage for men, with women receiving less than 80 percent of the coverage of men.
                                 This coverage disadvantage carries over to most of the specific categories and is
                                 especially salient in the fields of entertainment, politics, and sports. In entertain-
                                 ment, women receive substantially lower coverage overall and in subdomains. In
                                 politics, the difference in coverage is especially large, with men receiving five times
                                 greater coverage volume than women. There is one exception, with female judges
                                 receiving a larger share of news coverage than their male counterparts. In sports,
                                 successful female athletes receive about 60 percent of the coverage volume devoted
                                 to successful male athletes overall, and the difference is even larger in subcategories
                                 such as soccer and basketball.
                                     Two fields in which differences were not statistically significant were business
                                 and arts/literature. The results for the business category are particularly interest-
                                 ing, as both female business executives and female company founders receive a
                                 substantially higher coverage volume (three to 18 times higher) than their male
                                 counterparts. It appears then, that this might be the one major category where our
                                 first hypothesis does not hold.


                                  Domain-Stratified Public Interest
                                 The analyses presented in Table 1 take an important step toward examining media
                                 bias by stratifying men and women according to social and occupational domains
                                 and accounting for notable achievements. Still, they fail to control for the degree to


sociological science | www.sociologicalscience.com           539                                  September 2019 | Volume 6
Shor, van de Rijt, and Fotouhi                                                                  Large-Scale Test of Gender Bias


                                 which the public is actually interested in a certain individual. In Table 2, we present
                                 the matched-pairs comparisons of the various subdomains but this time comparing
                                 public interest as measured by Wikipedia page views. Similarly to Table 1, we
                                 report the numbers of matched pairs in each domain and subdomain (column 3) as
                                 well as the monthly media number of visits to the Wikipedia pages of these women
                                 and men (columns 4 and 5) and bootstrap tests for the difference between these two
                                 figures (column 6).
                                     Table 2 demonstrates that the median woman in our sample received more
                                 than 1.5 times more views of her Wikipedia page, suggesting greater overall public
                                 interest in these women. This result disconfirms our second hypothesis that men
                                 generate more public interest when compared with women in equivalent structural
                                 positions. Moreover, it suggests that women receive less media coverage despite
                                 enjoying greater public interest. This contrast between “supply” and “demand”
                                 presents strong evidence for gender bias. Had we found greater supply of and
                                 demand for men, then residual bias could be spurious, as a noisy measure of public
                                 demand would not fully account for gender differences. In the actual scenario,
                                 any measurement error in our measure of public interest renders our estimates
                                 conservative. That is, a more accurate measure would have provided even stronger
                                 estimates of net bias.
                                     The tendency for women to enjoy greater public interest was not consistent
                                 across all categories. Women received more page views in all of the entertainment
                                 subcategories and in most subcategories in the field of business. Conversely, in
                                 politics and in sports, the median woman actually received a substantially lower
                                 number of page views. In politics, women received about one-third of the page
                                 views that men received, and in sports, women received less than half of the public
                                 interest, with categories such as female soccer and female basketball drawing
                                 particularly low relative interest.


                                  Domain-Stratified Media Supply, Accounting for Public Interest
                                 Trying to assess media coverage while accounting for both structural position and
                                 public interest, we conducted a matched-pairs analysis, matching individuals on
                                 subdomains, Wikipedia page views (interest), and age. Table 3 presents the results
                                 of this analysis. We examined the median number of Wikipedia page views for
                                 men and for women (columns 4 and 5), which, because of the matching, was nearly
                                 perfectly balanced in the various categories, and the median number of mentions
                                 for men and for women in each domain and subdomain (columns 6 and 7). We then
                                 used bootstrap and permutation tests to compute whether the relative coverage of
                                 women exceeded or fell short of the relative interest in women (column 8, on the
                                 right-hand side of the table).
                                     Because Table 3 is quite dense, we present the main findings from the matched-
                                 pairs analysis (for all names and for each of the main domains) in Figure 1. The
                                 figure provides substantial support for our third hypothesis, showing that in all
                                 domains, except for sports, coverage for women was lower than that of similar-
                                 aged men who reached equivalent structural positions and had a similar number of
                                 Wikipedia page views. The overall median number of mentions per year for a man



sociological science | www.sociologicalscience.com           540                                  September 2019 | Volume 6
Shor, van de Rijt, and Fotouhi                                                                   Large-Scale Test of Gender Bias



Table 2: Public interest: Wikipedia page views for age-matched women and men in select categories (monthly
medians, 2004–2009).
                                                                                                  Relative coverage
                                                                              Interest: median    (women vs. men)
                                                                Number of        number of        and bootstrap tests
                                                                  matched     Wikipedia page      of difference (95%
Category                         Subcategory                         pairs    views per month     confidence intervals)
                                                                              Women      Men
All categories                   All names                           10,470     1,083     690     1.57 (1.498–1.647)†

Entertainment (U.S.)             All entertainers                     5,904     2,539    2,053    1.24 (1.16–1.33)†
                                 Film actors                          3,908     3,731    3,147    1.19 (1.09–1.29)†
                                 TV actors                            3,916     3,510    3,007    1.17 (1.08–1.27)†
                                 Film directors                         233     1,291      837    1.54 (1.03–1.96)†
                                 Singers                              1,097     1,539    1,798    0.86 (0.76–0.99)∗
                                 Pop singers                            219    14,890    4,245    3.51 (2.28–5.18)†
                                 Dancers                                169     5,093    1,254    4.06 (2.12–6.30)†
                                 Television personalities               353     2,852    1,750    1.63 (1.08–2.04)†
                                 Radio personalities                    103     1,223      658    1.86 (1.11–2.70) ∗
                                 Oscar nominees                         230    24,586   41,057    0.60 (0.49–0.77)†
                                 Emmy nominees                          145    14,207   19,221    0.74 (0.65–1.02) ∗

Politics (U.S.)                  All politicians                       828        251      748    0.34 (0.30–0.38)†
                                 Governors                              24      1,894    1,436    1.32 (0.65–3.81)
                                 Mayors                                112        240      201    1.19 (0.81–1.50)
                                 Cabinet secretaries                    21      3,569    5,993    0.60 (0.20–2.25)
                                 Presidential candidates                41        846    7,829    0.11 (0.05–0.31)†
                                 Judges                                135        234      151    1.55 (1.19–2.25)†
                                 House representatives                 150      1,320    1,192    1.11 (1.02–1.25) ∗
                                 Senators                               30      6,889    5,572    1.24 (0.77–1.67)

Business (U.S.)                  All businesspeople                    252        995      607    1.64 (1.32–2.11)†
                                 Chief executives                       99        837      464    1.80 (1.13–2.69) ∗
                                 Business executives                    40      1,677      451    3.72 (1.48–7.68)†
                                 Company founders                       16      4,779      695    6.88 (1.59–32.86)∗
                                 Billionaires                           26      2,528    2,139    1.18 (0.54–2.48)

Sports                           All athletes                         1,051       212      471    0.45 (0.41–0.50)†
                                 Tennis Grand Slam champions             59     3,126    4,388    0.71 (0.36–1.85)
                                 (all nations)
                                 Soccer players (U.S.)                 121        94       953    0.10 (0.05–0.15)†
                                 Basketball players (U.S.)             337       231     1,298    0.18 (0.15–0.21)†
                                 Golf players (U.S.)                   294       127       152    0.84 (0.74–0.98)†
                                 Olympic athletes (U.S.)               176       490       475    1.03 (0.65–1.28)

Arts and literature              All artists and writers              1,392      395       363    1.09 (0.96–1.23)
                                 Painters                               158      186       213    0.87 (0.73–1.11)
                                 Photographers                          237      354       289    1.22 (0.91–1.50)
                                 Sculptors                               74      169       138    1.22 (0.89–1.99)
                                 Writers                                874      524       509    1.03 (0.86–1.26)
                                 Pulitzer Prize winners                  50      712       810    0.88 (0.51–1.51)
∗p   < 0.05, † p < 0.01


sociological science | www.sociologicalscience.com             541                                 September 2019 | Volume 6
Shor, van de Rijt, and Fotouhi                                                                              Large-Scale Test of Gender Bias


Table 3: Coverage versus interest: article mentions of age-matched and page views–matched women and men
in selected categories (2004–2009).
                                                                                                               Relative coverage
                                                                                                               (women vs. men)/
                                                                   Interest: median        Coverage:            relative interest (women
                                                      Number of       number of         median number of       vs. men) and bootstrap
                                                        matched    Wikipedia page          newspaper           tests of difference (95%
Category                  Subcategory                      pairs   views per month      mentions per year      confidence intervals)
                                                                   Women        Men     Women       Men
All categories            All names                       10,420     1,074      1,075      300       826       0.36 (0.34; 0.38)†

Entertainment             All entertainers                 5,826     2,478      2,476       261       513      0.51 (0.48–0.55)†
(U.S.)                    Film actors                      3,766     3,508      3,511       296       494      0.60 (0.55–0.65)†
                          TV actors                        3,745     3,347      3,299       283       454      0.61 (0.57–0.69)†
                          Film directors                     229     1,287      1,288       664       870      0.76 (0.56–1.12)
                          Singers                          1,024     1,626      1,604       336       558      0.59 (0.51–0.73)†
                          Pop singers                        162     5,803      5,535     1,198     1,305      0.88 (0.65–1.46)
                          Dancers                            107     1,510      1,548       462       535      0.89 (0.54–1.33)
                          Television personalities           294     2,269      2,341       523       862      0.63 (0.49–0.90)†
                          Radio personalities                 85     1,135      1,143       238       480      0.50 (0.27–1.06)
                          Oscar nominees                     162    28,611     28,626    13,699    12,883      1.06 (0.85–1.47)
                          Emmy nominees                      100    17,587     18,510   5,470.5     6,699      0.86 (0.57–1.09)

Politics (U.S.)           All politicians                    780       271        274       592     1,019      0.59 (0.47–0.70)†
                          Governors                           22     1,894      1,895     7,656    20,508      0.37 (0.23–1.82)
                          Mayors                             101       231        235       709       762      0.95 (0.62–1.69)
                          Cabinet secretaries                 12     4,436      4,482     8,491    20,304      0.42 (0.15–1.22)
                          Presidential candidates             28     1,212      1,179     1,943     4,061      0.47 (0.16–1.53)
                          Judges                             109       146        151       662       273      2.52 (1.56–3.31)†
                          House representatives              134     1,353      1,363     5,262    10,230      0.52 (0.39–0.66)†
                          Senators                            25     7,014      7,353    38,306    52,880      0.76 (0.42–1.77)

Business (U.S.)           All businesspeople                 229       976        952       640       890      0.70 (0.50–0.99)∗
                          Chief executives                    71       560        553       870       613      1.40 (0.67–2.25)
                          Business executives                 13       991        952       800       855      0.90 (0.05–3.51)
                          Company founders                    12     1,160      1,126     1,495     3,169      0.46 (0.06–12.23)
                          Billionaires                        24     2,218      2,231     1,012     1,143      0.89 (0.24–1.54)

Sports                    All athletes                     1,010       227        226     1,418     1,569      0.90 (0.76–1.05)
                          Tennis Grand Slam                   29     4,325      4,388     9,828     4,036      2.47 (0.85–4.88)
                          champions (all nations)
                          Soccer players (U.S.)               55         453     458      1,233     1,363      0.91 (0.34–1.44)
                          Basketball players (U.S.)          289         271     269      3,131       692      4.49 (2.97–6.18)†
                          Golf players (U.S.)                268         138     138      1,014     1,647      0.62 (0.44–0.81)†
                          Olympic athletes (U.S.)            127         370     370      2,275     1,863      1.22 (0.72–1.57)

Arts and literature       All artists and writers          1,342         372     373        217       352      0.62 (0.52–0.72)†
                          Painters                           148         186     186         64       107      0.60 (0.30–1.01)
                          Photographers                      184         333     329        138       223      0.61 (0.40–0.84)†
                          Sculptors                           51         140     140         83       116      0.71 (0.33–1.76)
                          Writers                            815         480     486        281       499      0.57 (0.47–0.72)†
                          Pulitzer Prize winners              35         757     723      1,218     1,356      0.86 (0.46–2.64)
∗p   < 0.05, † p < 0.01



                                  (n = 826) was nearly three times higher than the median number of mentions for
                                  women (n = 300), with the difference highly significant (p < 0.01). We also found a
                                  substantial and significant difference (at least 1.5 times greater coverage volume for



sociological science | www.sociologicalscience.com                 542                                        September 2019 | Volume 6
Figure 1: Median number of newspaper mentions per year for men and women who were matched on
occupation, public interest, and age.
Shor, van de Rijt, and Fotouhi                                                                  Large-Scale Test of Gender Bias


                   1,800

                   1,600

                   1,400

                   1,200

   Median 1,000
   mentions
   per year 800
                     600

                     400

                     200

                        0
                                 All names      Entertainment     Politics      Business    Sports            Arts and
                                                                                                             Literature

                                                            Men         Women

Figure 1: Median number of newspaper mentions per year for men and women who were matched on
occupation, public interest, and age.


                                  men) in most of the specific domains, including politics, business, entertainment,
                                  and arts and literature.
                                      When examining more specific subdomains, Table 3 shows a large and statisti-
                                  cally significant coverage volume advantage for men in most of the entertainment
                                  subfields. Men also received a greater coverage volume in most categories of
                                  business and politics, although the difference was often nonsignificant because of
                                  small sample sizes. The category of business is especially interesting, as it clearly
                                  demonstrates the importance of accounting for public interest. In Table 1, where
                                  we did not account for this factor, women appeared to receive greater coverage
                                  than similarly positioned men in subdomains such as business chief executives and
                                  company founders. However, the results in Table 3 show that once we matched
                                  on public interest, which was much higher for successful businesswomen, this
                                  ostensible female coverage advantage vanished.
                                      Another category where accounting for public interest proved to be crucial was
                                  sports. Table 3 shows that after pairing on public interest, the coverage for female
                                  tennis Grand Slam champions and for American basketball players—two domains
                                  where men enjoy much higher public interest—was substantially higher than the
                                  coverage for matched males in each of these domains. The difference for basketball
                                  players was especially large (a coverage disparity of nearly 4.5:1 in favor of women)
                                  and clearly significant. These results stand in contrast to those reported in Table 1,
                                  where men enjoyed a clear coverage advantage, highlighting the importance of
                                  considering public interest when comparing coverage patterns.



sociological science | www.sociologicalscience.com                543                                September 2019 | Volume 6
Shor, van de Rijt, and Fotouhi                                                                  Large-Scale Test of Gender Bias


                                  Conclusion and Discussion
                                 In this study, we reassessed prior claims about gender bias in newspapers using
                                 a novel methodological approach. We compared media coverage (measured by
                                 name mentions) and public interest (measured through Internet activity) for more
                                 than 20,000 notable men and women in various social and occupational domains.
                                 Our study is the first to tackle the longstanding question of gender bias in media
                                 coverage while accounting not only for gender inequalities in structural positions
                                 and achievements but also for public interest. We found that despite greater public
                                 interest in the typical woman, the typical man was mentioned more than twice
                                 as much. After matching men and women by age, by structural position, and
                                 by public interest, newspapers clearly awarded men with a substantially larger
                                 coverage volume in nearly all fields. Hence, even women who have reached
                                 important achievements and who clearly garner considerable public interest are
                                 habitually less likely to receive media attention than men who attract equal public
                                 interest.
                                     Our study offers an important contribution not only to the mass communication
                                 literature on gendered media coverage differentials but also to the larger literature
                                 on cultural and occupational gender inequalities. Our findings demonstrate that
                                 theoretical propositions highlighting either structural inequalities or individual
                                 differences in motivation, effort, talent, or charisma are insufficient when trying to
                                 account for the gendered coverage gap. First, the research on gender inequalities in
                                 the job market has highlighted barriers for women both in entering professions and
                                 advancing within these professions (Cotter et al. 2001; England 2005, 2010; Morgan
                                 1998; Reskin 2003), contributing to women’s much lower presence in the public
                                 sphere, particularly in high-profile positions that tend to attract media attention. We
                                 previously suggested that these structural inequalities likely contribute considerably
                                 to the coverage gap, as this gap has somewhat narrowed with the growing entrance
                                 of women into the job market (Shor et al. 2015). Although such inequalities are
                                 indeed important, the present study demonstrates that they cannot fully explain
                                 the gap, which remains substantial even when comparing men and women who
                                 have reached similar positions and achievements.
                                     Similarly, propositions that focus on personal characteristics, motivations, and
                                 choices are also insufficient in accounting for the coverage gap. The literature on
                                 gender inequalities suggests that women may be considered less worthy of public
                                 attention. This is both because of cultural beliefs that devalue women and their
                                 actions (Ridgeway 2009, 2011, 2013) and because women suffer from shorter career
                                 durations in prominent offices (Cook and Glass 2013; Ryan and Haslam 2005), are
                                 assigned less important and salient positions (Kanter 1977; Madden 2012; Smith
                                 2002), and are less likely to be self-promoting (Castagnetti and Rosti 2013; Manning
                                 and Saidi 2010; Ridgeway et al. 2009). We argued that such differences, when they
                                 exist, should be, at least in part, manifested in reduced levels of public interest.
                                 That is, if successful women spend relatively less time in prominent positions and
                                 their actions are both devalued and less self-promoted, then we should expect the
                                 public to be less interested in them. However, we found that, in fact, most women
                                 who have reached leading positions and notable achievements in various social



sociological science | www.sociologicalscience.com           544                                  September 2019 | Volume 6
Shor, van de Rijt, and Fotouhi                                                                Large-Scale Test of Gender Bias


                                 and occupational fields tend to attract greater public interest when compared with
                                 men who have reached similar success. This may be a result of the lower number
                                 of women in leading positions, making them unique and therefore arguably more
                                 newsworthy. It could also be that those women who did reach key positions and
                                 achievements, despite well-documented barriers, are on average more qualified,
                                 talented, or charismatic than their male equivalents and thus draw greater public
                                 attention.
                                     To conclude, real-world structural inequalities and differential public interest
                                 appear to explain only about half of the full gender gap in coverage, which con-
                                 servatively stands at about 4:1 in favor of men (Macharia 2015). But even when
                                 accounting for these factors, we found that successful women still receive less than
                                 half the coverage volume of equally successful men who attract similar public inter-
                                 est. Following the logic adopted by recent studies on gender pay gaps (Castagnetti
                                 and Rosti 2013; Dinovitzer et al. 2009), we suggest that at least part of this large
                                 remaining gap is likely due to media bias and discrimination. Unequal gender
                                 coverage appears to be deeply ingrained in daily media practices of reporting. It
                                 may result from deeply entrenched gendered status ideologies and cultural norms
                                 (Ridgeway 2011, 2013) and from what media scholars (e.g., Rodgers and Thorson
                                 2003; Ross 2009; Ross and Carter 2011) have termed “the masculine culture of
                                 newsrooms.”
                                     But why is it that newspapers frequently seem to fail at meeting public interest?
                                 After all, journalistic aspirations to reach wider audiences, commercial considera-
                                 tions, and even concerns for social equity appear to suggest that a more balanced
                                 coverage, one that better caters to readers’ interests, might benefit newspapers.
                                 We propose four possible explanations for this large discrepancy. First, it may be
                                 that newsmakers are not fully aware of what public interest actually looks like
                                 and that they hold certain misconceptions about the topics and individuals that
                                 garner greater interest. After all, newsmakers are not immune to prevailing cultural
                                 norms that see men and their actions as intrinsically more interesting and important
                                 (Ridgeway 2009, 2011, 2013), and they may consequently ignore evidence to the
                                 contrary. Second, commercial interests may not align with public interest. For
                                 example, if newspapers and advertisers primarily target certain groups of readers,
                                 such as wealthier audiences or audiences who are more likely to make decisions
                                 about large purchases (e.g., cars or houses), then they would be primarily inter-
                                 ested in providing content about which these audiences would presumably like to
                                 read. Hence, if reporters and editors believe (whether rightfully or not) that their
                                 primary target audiences would like to read more about successful men than about
                                 successful women, then they will write about the former regardless of what the
                                 larger public is interested in. They may additionally cater to commercial interest
                                 by publishing paid content that features wealthy individuals, who are more likely
                                 male. Third, media-related inequalities may result from newsmakers failing to
                                 correct for men enjoying better access to reporters or being more responsive to their
                                 requests. And finally, editor and journalistic inclinations toward male coverage
                                 may stem from biases among agenda setters upstream, such as news agencies and
                                 tweeting presidents.




sociological science | www.sociologicalscience.com           545                                September 2019 | Volume 6
Shor, van de Rijt, and Fotouhi                                                                         Large-Scale Test of Gender Bias


                                  Notes
                                     1 See a discussion of the Wikipedia page views below.
                                     2 The median monthly number of Wikipedia page views is a relatively straightforward
                                      measure of public interest. Other potential measures, such as article length or the mere
                                      number of articles in Wikipedia may be a function of those who commonly write and
                                      edit Wikipedia pages—predominantly men.
                                     3 Paired t tests and Wilcoxon signed rank tests produce very similar test results. We
                                      report results from bootstrap tests as distributions of coverage and interest vary wildly
                                      across categories, frequently violating distributional assumptions of other tests. The
                                      reported confidence intervals are obtained from nonparametric bootstrapping of the
                                      paired sample. The p values are obtained from the permutation test in which within-pair
                                      genders are swapped randomly to create the resampling distribution.
                                     4 Moreover, in some categories (e.g., Oscar nominees, governors, senators, billionaires, or
                                      tennis Grand Slam champions) we analyze the full population rather than just a sample.
                                      For these analyses, any difference in coverage, whether statistically significant or not, is
                                      meaningful.



                                  References
                                 Atkeson, Lonna Rae, and Timothy B. Krebs. 2008. ”Press Coverage of Mayoral Candidates:
                                    The Role of Gender in News Reporting and Campaign Issue.” Political Research Quarterly
                                    61:239–52. https://doi.org/10.1177/1065912907308098
                                  Bautin, Mikhail, Charles Ward, Akshay Patil, and Steven Skiena. 2010. ”Access: News
                                     and Blog Analysis for the Social Sciences.” Paper presented at the 19th Interna-
                                     tional World Wide Web Conference, April 26–30, Raleigh, NC. Retrieved May 12, 2015
                                     (https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1772889). https://doi.org/10.1145/1772690.
                                     1772889
                                  Budig, Michelle J., and Paula England. 2001. ”The Wage Penalty for Motherhood.” American
                                     Sociological Review 66:204–25. https://doi.org/10.2307/2657415
                                  Castagnetti, Carolina, and Luisa Rosti. 2013. ”Unfair Tournaments: Gender Stereotyping
                                     and Wage Discrimination among Italian Graduates.” Gender & Society 27:630–58. https:
                                     //doi.org/10.1177/0891243213490231
                                  Cook, Alison, and Christy Glass. 2013. ”Glass Cliffs and Organizational Saviors: Barriers
                                     to Minority Leadership in Work Organizations?” Social Problems 60:168–87. https:
                                    //doi.org/10.1177/0891243213490231
                                  Cooky, Cheryl, Michael A. Messner, and Robin H. Hextrum. 2013. ”Women Play Sport, but
                                     Not on TV: A Longitudinal Study of Televised News Media.” Communication & Sport
                                    1:203–30. https://doi.org/10.1177/2167479513476947
                                  Correll, Shelley J. 2004. ”Constraints into Preferences: Gender, Status and Emerging Ca-
                                     reer Aspirations.” American Sociolgical Review 69:93–113. https://doi.org/10.1177/
                                     000312240406900106
                                  Cotter, David A., Joan M. Hermsen, Seth Ovadia, and Reeve Vanneman. 2001. ”The Glass
                                     Ceiling Effect.” Social Forces 80:655–81. https://doi.org/10.1353/sof.2001.0091
                                  Davis, Junetta. 1982. ”Sexist Bias in Eight Newspapers.” Journalism Quarterly 59:456–60.
                                    https://doi.org/10.1177/107769908205900316



sociological science | www.sociologicalscience.com                546                                     September 2019 | Volume 6
Shor, van de Rijt, and Fotouhi                                                                      Large-Scale Test of Gender Bias


                                  De Swert, Knut, and Marc Hooghe. 2010. ”When Do Women Get a Voice? Explaining the
                                     Presence of Female News Sources in Belgian News Broadcasts (2003–5).” European Journal
                                     of Communication 25:69–84. https://doi.org/10.1177/0267323109354229
                                  Dinovitzer, Ronit, Nancy Reichman, and Joyce Sterling. 2009. ”The Differential Valuation
                                     of Women’s Work: A New Look at the Gender Gap in Lawyers’ Incomes.” Social Forces
                                     88:819–64. https://doi.org/10.1353/sof.0.0260
                                  Eastman, Susan Tyler, and Andrew C. Billings. 2000. ”Sportscasting and Sports Reporting:
                                     The Power of Gender Bias.” Journal of Sport & Social Issues 24:192–213. https://doi.org/
                                     10.1177/0193723500242006
                                  England, Paula. 1992. Comparable Worth: Theories and Evidence. New York, NY: Aldine de
                                     Gruyter.
                                  England, Paula. 2005. ”Gender Inequality in Labor Markets: The Role of Motherhood and
                                     Segregation.” Social Politics 12:264–88. https://doi.org/10.1093/sp/jxi014
                                  England, Paula. 2010. ”The Gender Revolution: Uneven and Stalled.” Gender and Society
                                     24:149–66. https://doi.org/10.1177/0891243210361475
                                  England, Paula, and Su Li. 2006. ”Desegregation Stalled: The Changing Gender Composition
                                     of College Majors, 1971–2002.” Gender and Society 20:657–77. https://doi.org/10.1177/
                                     0891243206290753
                                  Falk, Erika. 2010. Women for President: Media Bias in Nine Campaigns. Champaign, IL:
                                     University of Illinois Press.
                                  Fernandez, Roberto M., and M. Lourdes Sosa. 2005. ”Gendering the Job: Networks and
                                     Recruitment at a Call Center.” American Journal of Sociology 111:859–904. https://doi.
                                     org/10.1086/497257
                                  Fiske, Susan. 2011. Envy up, Scorn Down: How Status Divides Us. New York, NY: Russell Sage
                                      Foundation.
                                  Folke, Olle, and Johanna Rickne. 2016. ”The Glass Ceiling in Politics: Formalization and
                                     Empirical Tests.” Comparative Political Studies 49:567–99. https://doi.org/10.1177/
                                     0010414015621073
                                  Fox, Richard L., and Jennifer L. Lawless. 2014. ”Uncovering the Origins of the Gender Gap
                                     in Political Ambition.” American Political Science Review 108:499–519. https://doi.org/
                                     10.1017/s0003055414000227
                                  Gallagher, Margaret. 2010. ”Global Media Monitoring Project (GMMP) 2010.” World
                                     Association of Christian Communictaion. http://cdn.agilitycms.com/who-makes-the-
                                     news/Imported/reports_2010/global/gmmp_global_report_en.pdf.
                                  Gans, Herbert J. 1979. Deciding What’s News: A Study of CBS Evening News, NBC Nightly News,
                                     Newsweek, and Time. New York, NY: Vintage Books.
                                  Glass, Jennifer, and Valerie Camarigg. 1992. ”Gender, Parenthood, and Job-Family Compati-
                                     bility.” American Journal of Sociology 98:131–51. https://doi.org/10.1086/229971
                                  Heldman, Caroline, Susan J. Carroll, and Stephanie Olson. 2005. ”‘She Brought Only
                                     a Skirt’: Print Media Coverage of Elizabeth Dole’s Bid for the Republican Presi-
                                     dential Nomination.” Political Communication 22:315–35. https://doi.org/10.1080/
                                     10584600591006564
                                  Hooghe, Marc, Laura Jacobs, and Ellen Claes. 2015. ”Enduring Gender Bias in Reporting
                                    on Political Elite Positions: Media Coverage of Female MPs in Belgian News Broadcasts
                                    (2003–2011).” The International Journal of Press/Politics 20:395–414. https://doi.org/10.
                                    1177/1940161215596730



sociological science | www.sociologicalscience.com              547                                   September 2019 | Volume 6
Shor, van de Rijt, and Fotouhi                                                                       Large-Scale Test of Gender Bias


                                 Jia, Sen, Thomas Lansdall-Welfare, Saatviga Sudhahar, Cynthia Carter, and Nello Cristianini.
                                      2016. ”Women Are Seen More Than Heard in Online Newspapers.” PLOS One 11:
                                      e0148434. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0148434
                                  Kanter, Rosabeth M. 1977. Men and Women of the Corporation. New York, NY: Basic Books.
                                  Kay, Fiona M., and John Hagan. 1995. ”The Persistent Glass Ceiling: Gendered Inequalities
                                     in the Earnings of Lawyers.” British Journal of Sociology 46:279–310. https://doi.org/
                                     10.2307/591789
                                  Kay, Fiona M., and John Hagan. 1998. ”Raising the Bar: The Gender Stratification of Law-Firm
                                     Capital.” American Sociolgical Review 63:728–43. https://doi.org/10.2307/2657336
                                  Khan, Walayet A., and Joāo Paolo Vieito. 2013. ”CEO Gender and Firm Performance.” Journal
                                     of Economics and Business 67:55–66. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeconbus.2013.01.
                                     003
                                  Lamont, Michèle.  2012.   ”Toward a Comparative Sociology of Valuation and
                                    Evaluation.” Annual Review of Scoiology 38:201–21. https://doi.org/10.1146/
                                    annurev-soc-070308-120022
                                  Lavery, Lesley. 2013. ”Gender Bias in the Media? An Examination of Local Television
                                     News Coverage of Male and Female House Candidates.” Politics and Policy 41:877–910.
                                     https://doi.org/10.1111/polp.12051
                                  Leicht, Kevin T. 2008. ”Broken Down by Race and Gender? Sociological Explanation of
                                     New Sources of Earnings Inequality.” Annual Review of Scoiology 34:237–55. https:
                                     //doi.org/10.1146/annurev.soc.34.040507.134627
                                  Macharia, Sarah. 2015. ”Global Media Monitoring Project 2015.” World Asso-
                                    ciation of Christian Communictaion. http://cdn.agilitycms.com/who-makes-the-
                                    news/Imported/reports_2015/global/gmmp_global_report_en.pdf.
                                  Madden, Janice Fanning. 2012. ”Performance-Support Bias and the Gender Pay Gap
                                    Among Stockbrokers.” Gender and Society 26:488–518. https://doi.org/10.1177/
                                    0891243212438546
                                  Manning, Alan, and Farzad Saidi. 2010. ”Understanding the Gender Pay Gap: What’s
                                    Competition Got to Do with It?” ILR Review 63:681–98. https://doi.org/10.1177/
                                    001979391006300407
                                  Marx Feree, Myra, and Bandana Purkayastha. 2000. ”Review: Equality and Cumulative
                                    Disadvantage: Reponse to Baxter and Wright.” Gender and Society 14:809–13. https:
                                    //doi.org/10.1177/089124300014006007
                                  McCombs, Maxwell E., and Donald L. Shaw. 1972. ”The Agenda-Setting Function of Mass
                                    Media.” Public Opinion Quarterly 36:176–87. https://doi.org/10.1086/267990
                                  Mills, Kay. 1997. ”What Difference Do Women Journalist Make?” Pp. 41–55 in Women, Media
                                     and Politics, edited by P. Norris. Oxford, United Kingdom: Oxford University Press.
                                  Morgan, Laurie A. 1998. ”Glass-Ceiling Effect or Cohort Efect? A Longitudinal Study of the
                                    Gender Earnings Gap for Engineers, 1982 to 1989.” American Sociolgical Review 63:479–83.
                                    https://doi.org/10.2307/2657263
                                  Nghiem, Le T. P., Sarah K. Papworth, Felix K. S. Lim, and Luis R. Carrasco. 2016. ”Analysis
                                    of the Capacity of Google Trends to Measure Interest in Conservation Topics and the Role
                                    of Online News.” PLOS One 11:e0152802. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.
                                    0152802
                                  Reskin, Barabara. 2003. ”Including Mechanisms in Our Models of Ascriptive Inequality:
                                     2002 Presidential Address.” American Sociolgical Review 68:1–21. https://doi.org/10.
                                     2307/3088900


sociological science | www.sociologicalscience.com              548                                    September 2019 | Volume 6
Shor, van de Rijt, and Fotouhi                                                                       Large-Scale Test of Gender Bias


                                  Reskin, Barabara F., and Denise D. Bielby. 2005. ”A Sociological Perspective on Gender and
                                     Career Outcomes.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 19:71–86. https://doi.org/10.1257/
                                     0895330053148010
                                  Ridgeway, Cecilia L. 2009. ”Framed Before We Know It: How Gender Shapes Social Relations.”
                                     Gender and Society 23:145–60. https://doi.org/10.1177/0891243208330313
                                  Ridgeway, Cecilia L. 2011. Framed by Gender: How Gender Inequality Persists in the Modern
                                     World. Oxford, United Kingdom: Oxford University Press.
                                  Ridgeway, Cecilia L. 2013. ”Why Status Matters for Inequality.” American Sociolgical Review
                                     79:1–16. https://doi.org/10.1177/0003122413515997
                                  Ridgeway, Cecilia L., Kristen Backor, Yan E. Li, Justine E. Tinkler, and Kristan G. Erickson.
                                     2009. ”How Easily Does a Social Difference Become a Status Distinction? Gender Matters.”
                                     American Sociolgical Review 74:44–62. https://doi.org/10.1177/000312240907400103
                                  Ridgeway, Cecilia L., and Shelley J. Correll. 2004. ”Unpacking the Gender System: A
                                     Theoretical Perspective on Cultural Beliefs and Social Relations.” Gender and Society
                                     18:510–31. https://doi.org/10.1177/0891243204265269
                                  Ripberger, Joseph T. 2011. ”Capturing Curiosity: Using Internet Search Trends to Measure
                                     Public Attentiveness.” Policy Studies Journal 39:239–59. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.
                                     1541-0072.2011.00406.x
                                  Robertson, Terry, Allison Conley, Kamila Szymczynska, and Ansley Thompson. 2009.
                                    ”Gender and the Media: An Investigation of Gender, Media, and Politics in the 2000
                                     Election.” New Jersey Journal of Communication 10:104–17. https://doi.org/10.1080/
                                     15456870209367418
                                  Rodgers, Shelly, and Esther Thorson. 2003. ”A Socialization Perspective on Male and
                                     Female Reporting.” Journal of Communication 53:658–75. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.
                                     1460-2466.2003.tb02916.x
                                  Ross, Karen. 2009. Gendered Media: Women, Men, and Identity Politics. Lanham, MD: Rowman
                                     and Littlefield Publishers.
                                  Ross, Karen, and Cynthia Carter. 2011. ”Women and News: A Long Winding Road.” Media,
                                     Culture and Society 33:1148–65. https://doi.org/10.1177/0163443711418272
                                  Ryan, Michelle K., and S. Alexander Haslam. 2005. ”The Glass Cliff: Evidence That Women
                                     Are Over-Represented in Precarious Leadership Positions.” British Journal of Management
                                     16:81–90. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8551.2005.00433.x
                                  Sanchez, Laura, and Elizabeth Thomson. 1997. ”Becoming Mothers and Fathers: Parenthood,
                                     Gender, and the Division of Labor.” Gender and Society 11:747–72. https://doi.org/10.
                                     1177/089124397011006003
                                  Shor, Eran, Arnout van de Rijt, Charles Ward, Saoussan Asakar, and Steven Skiena. 2014a.
                                     ”Is There a Political Bias? A Computational Analysis of Female Subjects’ Coverage in
                                     Liberal and Conservative Newspapers.” Social Science Quarterly 95:1213–29. https:
                                     //doi.org/10.1111/ssqu.12091
                                  Shor, Eran, Arnout van de Rijt, Charles Ward, Aaron Blank, and Steven Skiena. 2014b. ”Time
                                     Trends in Printed News Coverage of Female Subjects, 1880–2008.” Journalism Studies
                                     15:759–73. https://doi.org/10.1080/1461670x.2013.834149
                                  Shor, Eran, Arnout van de Rijt, Alex Miltsov, Vivek Kulkarni, and Steven Skiena. 2015.
                                     ”A Paper Ceiling: What Explains the Sex-Ratio Inequality in Printed News Coverage?”
                                     American Sociological Review 80:960–84. https://doi.org/10.1177/0003122415596999
                                  Shor, Eran, Arnout van de Rijt, and Alex Miltsov. 2019. ”Do Women in the Newsroom
                                     Make a Difference? Sentiment toward Women and Men as a Function of Newsroom
                                     Composition.” Sex Roles 81:44–58. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11199-018-0975-8


sociological science | www.sociologicalscience.com              549                                    September 2019 | Volume 6
Shor, van de Rijt, and Fotouhi                                                                          Large-Scale Test of Gender Bias


                                  Skiena, Steven, and Charles Ward. 2013. Who’s Bigger? Where Historical Figures Really Rank.
                                     Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/
                                     CBO9781139649605
                                  Smith, Kevin B. 1997. ”When All’s Fair: Signs of Parity in Media Coverage of Female Candi-
                                     dates.” Political Communication 14:71–82. https://doi.org/10.1080/105846097199542
                                  Smith, Ryan A. 2002. ”Race, Gender, and Authority in the Workplace: Theory and Re-
                                    search.” Annual Review of Scoiology 28:509–42. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.soc.
                                    28.110601.141048
                                  Solomon, David H., Eugine Soltes, and Denis Sosyura. 2014. ”Winners in the Spotlight:
                                     Media Coverage of Fund Holdings as a Driver of Flows.” Journal of Financial Economics
                                     113:53–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2014.02.009
                                  Sorensen, Alan T. 2007. ”Bestseller Lists and Product Variety.” The Journal of Industrial
                                     Economics 55:715–38. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-6451.2007.00327.x
                                 Tuchman, Gaye. 1979. ”Women’s Depiction by the Mass Media.” Signs 4:528–42.
                                 Van de Rijt, Arnout, Eran Shor, Charles Ward, and Steven Skiena. 2013. ”Only 15 Minutes?
                                    The Social Stratification of Fame in Printed Media.” American Sociological Review 78:266–
                                    89.https://doi.org/10.1177/0003122413480362
                                 Wasburn, Philo C., and Mara H. Wasburn. 2011. ”Media Coverage of Women in Politics: The
                                    Curious Case of Sarah Palin.” Media, Culture & Society 33:1027–41. https://doi.org/10.
                                    1177/0163443711415744
                                 Weber, Andrea, and Christine Zulehner. 2010. ”Female Hires and the Success of Start-up
                                   Firms.” The American Economic Review 100:358–61. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.100.
                                   2.358
                                 Yoshida, Mitsou, Yuki Arase, Takaaki Tsunoda, and Mikio Tamamoto. 2015. ”Wikipedia Page
                                    View Reflects Web Search Trend.” Paper presented at the Proceedings of the ACM Web
                                    Science Conference, June 28–July 1, Oxford, United Kingdom. Retrieved June 14, 2017.
                                    http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2786451.2786495


                                     Eran Shor: Department of Sociology, McGill University. E-mail: eran.shor@mcgill.ca.

                                     Arnout van de Rijt: Social and Behavioural Sciences, Utrecht University.
                                     E-mail: arnoutvanderijt@gmail.com.

                                     Babak Fotouhi: Program for Evolutionary Dynamics, Harvard University.
                                     E-mail: babak_fotouhi@fas.harvard.edu.




sociological science | www.sociologicalscience.com                550                                     September 2019 | Volume 6
