University of Maryland Francis King Carey School of Law

DigitalCommons@UM Carey Law
Faculty Scholarship

Francis King Carey School of Law Faculty

1990

Gender Bias in the Classrom
Taunya Lovell Banks
University of Maryland School of Law, tbanks@law.umaryland.edu

Follow this and additional works at: https://digitalcommons.law.umaryland.edu/fac_pubs
Part of the Law and Gender Commons, and the Legal Education Commons

Digital Commons Citation
Banks, Taunya Lovell, "Gender Bias in the Classrom" (1990). Faculty Scholarship. 215.
https://digitalcommons.law.umaryland.edu/fac_pubs/215

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Francis King Carey School of Law Faculty at
DigitalCommons@UM Carey Law. It has been accepted for inclusion in Faculty Scholarship by an authorized
administrator of DigitalCommons@UM Carey Law. For more information, please contact
smccarty@law.umaryland.edu.

GENDER BIAS IN THE CLASSROOM
Taunya Lovell Banks•

I.

INTRODUCTION

After listening to the three other speakers, I suppose I am here
to answer the question: "Is all of this really important?" I am here
to provide empirical data to support the claims ·of the previous
speakers.
I think we tend to forget that until 1950, H~rvard, the most
prestigious law school, did not admit women, and other law schools
admitted few women. 1 In 1969, one .year after I graduated from law
school, women comprised only 7o/o .of all students in ABA-approved
law schools. 2 A study of thirty-five women at a small southwestern
law school during that period found that women in many ways
duri~g the late 1960s and early .1970s behaved like members of other
minority groups. 3 They tended to ghettoize themselves, forming patterns of physical separation. In particular, those women tended to
sit together. in the class. 4 The researcher, Alice Jacobs, concluded
that the women surveyed viewed themselves as members of a minority
group and, believed that others. also. viewed them that way. 5 Jacobs,
writing in 1972, concluded that .women learn how to communicate
to others as women and often are negatively sanctioned by society
and peers for unfeminine behavior. 6 Women in law school, to succeed, are too often expected to adopt male preferred modes of
communication and behavior.

• . Professor, University of Maryland School of Law; B.A. 196S, Syracuse University;
J.D. 1968, Howard University.
1. See generally, K.B. MoRELLO, THE INVISmLE BAR 39-107 (1986). Although Harvard is
often cited as being among the last to admit women, Washington & Lee still barred women
as late as 1972, twenty-two years after Harvard Law School admitted its frrst woman student.
Goldberg, Then and Now: 75 Years of Change, 16 A.B.A.J. S6 (1990).
2. AMERICAN BAR AssOCIATION, A REVIEW OF LEGAL EDUCATION IN 11IE UNITED STATES
FALL 1987 66 (1988).
3. Jacobs, Women in Law School: Structural Constraint and Personal Choice in the
Formation of Professional Identity, 24 J. LEGAL EDuc. 462 (1972).
4, Id. at 467.
S. Id. at 467-68.
6. ld. at 471. Jacobs also obser-Ved that women volunteered and were chosen less often
than men. /d. at 470.

527

HeinOnline -- 14 S. Ill. U. L.J. 527 1989-1990

528

Southern Illinois University Law Journal

[Vol. 14

My study was conducted more than fifteen years later. The
number of women have increased dramatically since 1969. For example, in 1988-89, women comprised 420Jo of all students in AHAapproved law schools.' Despite the significant increases in 'the past
fifteen years, many women still feel as though they are "strangers
in a strange land." They perceive American law schools as andrecentric, white, upper-middle class domains. Today's women may
have equal access to legal education, but they do not necessarily
receive an equal legal education. It is almost as though we are
admitted to law school, but denied the use of a bathroom-or perhaps
the law library.
My original study looked at five law schools. 8 The data I am
going to talk about today is data I collected over the past three years
and includes those five schools. It consists of in-class surveys administered at fourteen law schools during the 1987-88 and 1988-89
academic year. Four of the schools were private; ten schools were
public; four schools were located in the East; two in the West; none
in California or Chicago; four were southern or southwestern schools,
and four were north-central schools. My sample consists of approximately 1,930 responses from first- through third-year students. Approximately 60% of respondents were men and 40% were women.
In the latest compilation, approximately 14% of the respondents were
people of color. 9 Though we are talking about women here, almost
everything said at this symposium about exclusion of women must
also be said about people of color-and it goes doubly for women
of color-a point I'll address' at the end.
For those of you who are interested in statistics, chi-square
statistical tests were used to test the differences among men and
women. For each of the variables reported as statistically significant,
I used the .01 level or beyond as a measure. If you know anything
about statistics, generally .05 is considered statistically significant.
So I am not talking about marginal significance. Further, most of
the statistically significant findings have a .001 or greater level of
significance.
In addition to those in-class surveys, last spring we conducted
taped, in-depth interviews with a sub-sample of students at my former
7. AHEluCAN BAR AssociATION, A REVIEW OP LEGAL EDUCATION IN TilE UNITED STATES
FAU 1988 66 (1989) (hereinafter A REVIEW OP LEGAL EDUCATION FAU 1988).
8. Banks, Gender Bias in the Classroom, 38 J. LEGAL EDuc. 137 (1988).
9. Minorities currently comprise only ll.80Jo of all students in American Bar Association
(ABA) approved law schools. A REvmw oP LEGAL EDUCATION FALL 1988, supra note 7, at
68.

HeinOnline -- 14 S. Ill. U. L.J. 528 1989-1990

1990]

Bias in the Classroom

529

institution. We did that as part of a pilot study. I plan to conduct
more interviews at other law schools. We need to talk to students
because the in-class survey results raised a lot of questions and left
others unanswered.
II. THE STUDY RESULTS: WOMEN'S PERCEPTIONS OF
THE LAW SCHOOL CLASSROOM
In my study, I found that more women than men perceive the
law school classroom as alienating and hostile. Why? There are
several explan.ations, including lack of encouragement or actual discouragement by the professor, hostility from male students, and the
law school environment in general.
A.

The Importance of Encouragement

In 1984, Bernice Sandler and Roberta Hall published a study on
the classroom climate at undergraduate institutions. 10 Their study
gave me the idea for my study of law schools.
Let me tell you a little story that Bernice Sandler told last
summer at the Association of American Law Schools (AALS) Section
on Contracts teacher's conference. Bernice talked about a longitudinal
study of male and female high school valedictorians. All of the
valedictorians were asked the sanie question-first, at the end of
their last year of high school, then at the end of their first year in
college, and lastly, at the end of their fourth year in college. That
question was, "Do you consider yourself smarter than your classmates?"
At the end of high school, alffiost an equal number of male and
female valedictorians said "yes," approximately 300Jo. At the end of
the first year of college, approximately 25% of the men and only
11 OJo of the women said "yes." At the end of the fourth year of
college, approximately one third of the men said "yes," but none
of the women said "yes." Assuming undergraduate education similarly affects most women, the bright women we see entering law
school today are the survivors who survived in a large part without
their self-esteem, or certainly with a withered self-esteem.
So perhaps it is more important that we are encouraging to
women. But women are not the only students who need encourage-

10. Hall & Sandler, The Classroom Climate: A Chilly One for Women?, Project on the
Status and Education of Women (Washington, D.C. 1984).

HeinOnline -- 14 S. Ill. U. L.J. 529 1989-1990

530

Southern Illinois University Law Journal

[Vol. 14

ment. I talk to a lot of men from working class backgrounds who
feel just as alienated by this androcentric, upper-middle class environment as women and people of color. I think we fail tg. realize
that the law school of today is much more diverse than it was twenty
or thirty years ago. It is more diverse with regard to class, gender,
and color. Yet we still continue to teach in the same way we taught
almost 100 years ago though we are teaching different people. The
question raised by some of the responses and perceptions from the
student surveys is whether we are doing an effective job of educating,
our alleged aim in law school. If we are not encouraging maximum
performance by the bulk of the people in the classrooms, then we
really are not educating.
·
B. Students Report Lack of Encouragement
My expanded study supports the findings of my earlier study
that more women than men believe that their professors did not
encourage them. 11 They also say that the professors perhaps neither
encourage nor discourage them. 12 Second, women reported less voluntary class participation than men. 13 Also, their level of voluntary
class participation decreases over tinie. 14 Think back to your first
year of law school, think about how many women talked in class.
Who do you think ·spoke most in class? What is interesting is that
most men and women say that men speak more than women, but
men are more likely to report that both speak equally. However, few
students say that women speak more often than men. Yet this is
certainly a possibility as we approach 50-50 in terms of classroom
composition-especially since one of the stereotypical images of
women is that we are always talking.
When I first started teaching in law school~ there were few
women in the classroom. All of a sudden I realized that at least onethird· of the students in my class were women. I became interested
in the silence of women because I did not hear them speak in class
very often. I noticed that even the ·women who spoke in the first
year did not voluntarily participate by the time I got them in an
advanced third-year class. Then I tried looking at women who were

11. Banks, supra note 8, at 143. The difference in the initial study was not statistically
significant but in the expanded study had a significance rate for white women of .04.
12. /d. Once more white women are more likely to report this perception.
13. ld. at 141.
14. ld. at 142.

HeinOnline -- 14 S. Ill. U. L.J. 530 1989-1990

1990]

Bias in the Classroom

531

speaking the first year. I found that the women who volunteered
most often in the first year were the older women. However, by the
third year, I found that these women were the most silent. This was
intuition, but the empirical data I collected tends to support this
observation. The women who report voluntary participation most in
the first year are the ones who speak least by the third year.
C. Discouraging Behavior by Professors
Students in every school surveyed also reported that some professors still continue to make offensive comments in the classroom.
I used the term "offensive comments" on purpose because I wanted
students to tell me what kinds of comments, questions or humor
they found offensive. The overwhelming number of examples given
by students were sexist comments. Let me give you some examples.
In a course on Law and Psychiatry, the professor said, "Women
make love to get advanced or to hurt someone, but men make love
for love." 15
·
I. believe someone earlier was talking about a conversation he
had with someone else when the person used the term "bitch."
"Bitch" must be a favorite word used for women in law school.
Almost every school reported· at least one professor · who, in the
classroom, used the term "bitch" to refer to women. Students at
my former institution said, during a discussion on this topic, that
the Women's Law Caucus members are called "Law Bitches" by
male law students. Students at another ·school reported that one
professor in a course on family law, during a discussion of a case
involving alimony said, "When you sleep with a bitch, you get
fleas. " 16 ·
·
·
One of the comments I cited in my article and the one I think
surprises most people is: "The professor drew a large circle around
the title of the subject matter of the day's lesson that he'd written
on the board. When class began, he said, 'Pretend this is a large
breast."' 11 Well, I reported this during a presentation at my former
institution. The very next day a professor who taught the same
section I taught walked into class, put two dots on the board, drew
a circle around each dot, turned around to the class, and laughed.
His actions consciously demeaned me, a colleague and woman of

1S. ld.
16. ld. at 144.
17. ld.

HeinOnline -- 14 S. Ill. U. L.J. 531 1989-1990

532

Southern Illinois University Law Journal

[Vol. 14

color. His actions also alienated many women and some men in the
class.
A teacher's behavior in the classroom can alienate students and
impair learning. More women than men reported that professors lack
respect for their comments or responses to questions. 18 This lack of
respect can be expressed in nonverbal ways. The behavior I am about
to describe is not behavior limited to men. Those of us in the
profession, myself included, made it through law school and on to
law faculties. In the process we have unconsciously adopted a lot of
negative behavior. All of us need to think about how we teach.
How many times has a woman raised her hand and said, "I
... I ... don't know if this is right, but I remember when I was
working for so and so ... " and proceeded to tell a story. You stand
there and either your eyes glaze over, or you interrupt. Or when she
completes her story, which often is completely relevant, you restate
in the male-preferred, abstract language, the idea she conveyed. Or
you do not make eye contact at all, but look someplace else, or you
doodle. You may sit there and say, "When is this person going to
finish?" Your nonverbal behavior sends a message, a negative message, to the student.
Even when the student gives the correct response, but perhaps
not. quite in the way you wanted, you may give a negative response.
Perhaps the student responds in a narrative mode, or the student
prefaces the remark by explaining how she feels. Too often we
encourage students to pretend that the p~ople we read about in the
cases are not real and that law students should not be. concerned
about what happens to them. The. professor moves on to another
student who gives the answer in the male-preferred method, and we
say: "Wonderful! Right on point." We often give the positive
response, the encouragement to the male or to the woman who recites
the information in the male-preferred way.
There are positive and negative ways law teachers send messages
to students which can encourage or discourage class participation.
Unfortunately, we all engage in some form of discouraging behavior.
For example, I really find it very difficult not to let my eyes glaze
over when a student, male or female, starts talking and goes on ad
nauseam. I sit and think: "Pretend you're interested. Don't let them
know that this is boring you to death. Try to find something good
to say about this comment." We must find ways to encourage
~

18. ld. at 143.

HeinOnline -- 14 S. Ill. U. L.J. 532 1989-1990

Bias in the Classroom

1990]

533

students to participate in class, even if they are wrong. To me the
worst thing is for a student not to know that she or he is on the
wrong track until she or he gets the grade for the course.
. One common complaint about law teachers, of which I am
guilty, is interrupting students. When you look at who gets interrupted most often, it is women or men who talk like women. The
men in class who talk like women are those who talk about their
experiences, or how they feel. We also tend to interrupt students
who are idealists, who always want to talk about another approach
that is not in the textbooks, or not in the professor's notes. An
article recently published by a third-year law student recounts a class
where a female law student repeatedly brought up nontraditional
approaches to the problems discussed in class. 19 Students were initially
very supportive because her comments made the class interesting.
They were refreshing and caused students· to think about concepts in
different ways. The professor kept sending negative messages to the
student. By the second and third years, students knew ~etter than to
make those kinds of comments.
D. Hostility Froin
Male Students
.
.

_ A second problem that you have in law school and in the
classrooms is the hostility of male students to female students or to
male students who talk like female students. This has · a negative
effect on the· classroom. Oftentimes it is hard for law teachers to
deal with this problem, especially women law teachers.
A common assumption is that older men tend to be more sexist.
However, the surveys arid interviews suggest that the males who are
most sexist are not the older men, who perhaps are more secure
about their sexuality, but are the ·men 25 and under. The younger
males, according to the survey comments, make hostile statements
about women and women law professors. 20
I think it is important that we have programs like this that are
well attended by men, that are sanctioned and encouraged by male
law professors who serve as role models for the appropriate behavior
in law school. It is important that these young men understand sexist
behavior is unacceptable.
·

19. Matthews, Sketches for a New Law School, 40 HAsTINos L.J. 1095, 1097-8 (1989).
20. See, e.g., Banks, supra note 8, at 145; Weiss & Melling, The Legal Education of
Twenty Women, 40 STAN. L. REv. 1299, 1324-26 (1988).

HeinOnline -- 14 S. Ill. U. L.J. 533 1989-1990

534

E.

Southern Illinois University Law Journal

[Vol. 14

The Law School Environment in General

The silence of women in the classroom is a manifestation of the
degree of alienation of law students in general. One of the most
surpr,ising things I found in my earlier study is that 40% of thirdyear .students report that they never volunteer in class by the time
they get to the third year. That is an incredibly high number of
people and is extremely distressing. It means that we are doing
something wrong.
Obviously, the law classroom is silencing not only to women,
but to others as well. This means that there is a great deal of
dissatisfaction with legal education today. The women we interviewed
identified the large classrooms and the competitive nature of the law
school classroom as things they most disliked about law school.
Large classrooms foster a sense of isolation and alienation. Not
surprisingly, people of color also report feeling terribly alienated by
being in large classes, especially when there are so few people of
color in most law schools. The competitive nature of the classroom
is also very inhibiting. Repeatedly the women we interviewed last
spring said: "the classroom environment is not supportive. It is very
competitive. I find it alienating. I refuse to participate in this cannibalistic kind of process."
;. This raises questions about the law school. culture in general
because of the extent and degree. to which we allow and even
encourage unhealthy competition. I am· not saying that law students
should not be competitive, but some competition is unhealthy. Many
students who do not make the law review by the end of their first
year are turned off by law school. They are marking their time until
they can graduate and get a job. First-year grades ·often determine
who gets the prestigious or well-paying jobs. The late bloomer or
outsider unfamiliar with the law school process is penalized. We
seldom reward improved performance in law school. So the first
year, the year when the most support is needed, is the year students
receive the least amount from classmates and little encouragement
from law teachers if students do not speak their language.
Sexism in law school is damaging to both men and women.
From the survey, we tried to determine the extent sexism affects the
rates of voluntary participation. I thought that all women would say
that it is a factor. I found that the men who are sensitive to these
issues are more likely than women to report being offended by overt
sexist comments and remarks. Maybe it is because the women already
have been silenced. Sexism in law classrooms is damaging because it
reinforces stereotypical notions about women's roles and attitudes

HeinOnline -- 14 S. Ill. U. L.J. 534 1989-1990

Bias in the Classroom

1990]

535

toward women, attitudes which law graduates then carry out into
the real world. Lawyers are the people responsible for making and
administering the laws, and for providing legal representation. If law
graduates leave school with these skewed notions about people, how
can we expect the administration of the legal system to be fair and
equitable? Law schools have an affirmative obligation to sensitize
law students and law professors to the continuing vestiges of sexism.
III.

PERSPECTIVES OF HISPANIC AND
AFRICAN AMERICAN STUDENTS

As I indicated at the outset, I believe that students of color
share with women some of the negative perceptions about law school.
My current project looks at the perceptions of Hispanic American
and African American students about law school to determine the
extent and degrees to which their perceptions are similar to perceptions of women. 21 Most of the women in my initial study were white.
But with a larger sample, we now have significant numbers of women
and men of color. In this survey, we exclude white women and use
white· men as the norm because law schools initially were designed
to educate white males. We compare people of color with white
males.
. Our results indicate that white males' perceptions in the classroom are not shared by people of color. Although people of color
do not hold monolithic perceptions of their professors, they did
collectively differ from white men in important ways. First, people
of color are more likely to perceive that very few of their professors
respect their questions and comments. 22 Some social science studies
of students tend to suggest that many people of color leave school
with withered self-images. 23 So successful people of color may be
entering law school much like the women high school valedictorians.
They may have done well in school, but do not feel good about
themselves vis-a-vis others, and may need more encouragement than
others, particularly white, middle class men.

21. Banks & Blocker, African-American and Hispanic American Student Perceptions of
the Low School Classroom: Setting a Research Agenda, (unpublished manuscript on file with
author).
22. ld. at 8. The survey found 17.1 OJo white males perceived respect from very few
professors, compared to 31.4% African-American and 33.30Jo Hispanic-Americans [x' = 30.02
df = 6 p <. 0001 n = 1142).
23. See, e.g., Drury, Black Self-Esteem and Desegregated Schools, 53 Soc. OP Eouc. 88
(1980) (high school).

HeinOnline -- 14 S. Ill. U. L.J. 535 1989-1990

536

Southern Illinois University Law Journal

[Vol. 14

Second, African Americans are more likely to perceive that
professors embarrass or put-down students, and use offensive humor
in class. 24 This pattern of responses suggests that the classr..oom is
perceived as an alienating environment by students of color:·· Third,
there were also some similarities and differences in the rates of
voluntary participation. For example, Hispanic Americans are three
times as likely as African Americans to report never volunteering in
class. 25 These are students who said they really wanted to participate,
but did not do so.
In our interviews last spring, a woman of color explained some
of the reasons why she does not participate in class when she wants.
She said that she does not participate when she feels most' strongly
about an issue. She feared that her emotion would take over her
logic and that she would blurt out something "illogical." The example
she mentioned was her criminal law class discussion of the Bernhard
Goetz shooting. During this class, a point was made about the fear
Goetz had of the black teenagers who approached him on the subway
and· the reasonableness of his fear that he was going to be mugged.
This woman was the only person of color in the entire class of
seventy-five students. Finally, unable to contain herself, she blurted
out a response, and was surprised that her response was logical. This
student's comments typify the feeling of many students that if I
don't speak the correct language, I do not have the right to respond;
I cannot participate because my feelings are not valid, or even if
they are valid, I cannot say them in the right way. Therefore, I will
say nothing. The student who is silenced this way is deprived of the
opportunity to express an opinion and to have that opinion validated.
Just as importantly, the students who do not hear the comment are
also deprived of her perspective.
IV.

CONCLUSION

Full equality in the sense of equal access to a legal education is
not enough when you have educational institutions like law schools

24. Banks & Blocker, supra note 21, at 9-11. In the survey, 27.1 OJo African-Americans
reported professors "frequently" use offensive humor in class, compared to 18.9% Hispanic
Americans and 14.6% white males. [x' = 16.56 df = 4 p < .005 n=453].
25. /d. at 12. In the survey, 23.60Jo Hispanic-Americans reported never volunteering in
class, compared to 7.2% African-Americans and 9.20Jo white males [x' = 18.60 df = 4 p <
.001 n = 1150]. However, when the two historically African-American law schools were
removed, 200Jo of minority students compared to 9.5% of white males report never volunteering
in class. lx' = 17.6 df = 2 p < .0001 n = 967).

HeinOnline -- 14 S. Ill. U. L.J. 536 1989-1990

1990]

Bias in the Classroom

537

that may perpetuate inequality structurally, and through messages
linked to a student's gender or race, or through a curriculum which
denies the perspectives of women or people of color, or treats socalled "women's issues" or "people of color issues" marginally. 26
While the composition of law students has changed dramatically over
the last twenty years, the law school classroom is still structured to
meet the needs of white upper-middle class males. The result is
alienated students whose performance may be adversely affected.
Law teachers' behavior in the classroom is a factor. When the
teacher's classroom behavior alienates students, the law school is not
doing its job.
Response by Jill E. Adams**

I am not quite sure how to respond to Professor Banks's
presentation to the extent that her data is sociological. I do not have
an expertise in that area and am not trained in sociological methodology. I find it interesting, however, that she finds that women
report that they speak less than men report that they speak. There
are observational studies on the undergraduate level that find that
women are more silent in the classroom. 27 My first question is whether
the phenomenon Professor Banks describes is something that happens
in the classroom, or whether it is something involving women's
perceptions of themselves because they do not realize their contributions to the class? I think it may be some of both.
I concede that there are techniques used by professors which
contribute to women's silence in the classroom, particularly things
like the length of time a teacher will pause before allowing a student
· to respond to a question. One study suggested that about five seconds
was an optimal amount of time to pause to allow a student to collect
thoughts and to comment. 28 Studies indicate that teachers rarely give
26. For a discussion of this issue, see Crenshaw, Foreward: Toward a Race-Conscious
Pedagogy in Legal Education, 11 NAT. BLACK L.J. 1 (1989); Weiss & Melling, supra note 20;
Boyle, Teaching Law As If Women Really Mattered, Or What About the Washroom?, 2
CANADIAN J. WoMEN & L. 96 (1986). For a more general discussion, see CLAss RAcE, AND
GENDER IN AMERICAN EDUCATION 1-7 (L. Weis ed. 1988); Giroux, Theories of Reproduction
and Resistance in the New Sociology of Education: A Critical Analysis, 53 HARv. Eouc. REv.
257 (1983).
•• Assistant Professor, Southern Illinois University School of Law; B.A. 1974, University
of North Carolina; M.A.T. 1978, University of Massachusetts; J.D. 1982, University of New
Mexico.
·
27. See Hall & Sandler, supra note 10, at 7-8 and references cited therein.
28. Rowe, Wait-Time and Rewards as Instructional Variables, Their Influence on Language,
Logic, and Fate Control, 11 J. REs. IN Sci. TEACIUNO 81 (1974); see also J. LoWMAN,
MAsTERING THE TECHNIQUES OF TEACIUNG 135-36 (1984) (recommending a ten-second pause).

HeinOnline -- 14 S. Ill. U. L.J. 537 1989-1990

538

Southern Illinois University Law Journal

[Vol. 14

that amount of time to anyone. 29 Some of these studies, however,
have suggested that teachers, at least in some settings, give a longer
amount of time for response to male students than to female students.30 I would be very interested in seeing a follow-up on the kinds
· of studies Professor Banks has done that tries to correlate this type
of observational study to the self-reports.
It is also true that to the extent we are talking about self-esteem
and a sense of empowerment, there is significance in the fact that
women report themselves as participating less in class whether or not
this report is substantiated by empirical evidence. If women participate as frequently as men, but view themselves as contributing to
class less frequently, this is important data. If a woman, even a
high-school valedictorian, reports that she is less intelligent in comparison to her classmates after four years of college than she felt
upon entering college, she may also report that she does not contribute to her law school class even when she does. This lack of selfesteem may then, in fact, cause her to become more silent.
· Much of what we have been talking about today is empowerment, an internalized sense that one is competent and able to perform
the skills necessary to our profession. It is not a question of laying
blame, or of saying that we, as women, are victimized. The theme
which has echoed throughout this symposium is that we need to find
a way to empower ourselves, to comment, to take full advantage of
the education that is offered, to speak. Part of the methodology of
law school education, particularly in the first year where many
professors call on students who do not volunteer, is to emphasize
and give practice in speaking. This is justified on the grounds that
so much of the legal profession involves speaking. We need to be
very concerned about the fact that if we, as women, speak less, then
we are also failing to take advantage of the opportunity to train
ourselves in the skills of our profession.
There is another theme that has struck me in the papers and
comments today. We have repeatedly heard that women tend to
speak in narrative rather than abstractly. We have also heard that
this mode of thought is frequently discredited. There is a growing
body of thought in philosophy now which talks about how our

29. Rowe, Wait-Time: Slowing Down May Be a Way of Speeding Up!, 37 J. TcHR. Eouc.
43 (1986).
30. See, e.g., Leder, Teacher-Student Interaction: A Case Study, 18 Eouc. STUD. IN
MATHEMATICS 2SS (1987); Gore & Roumagoux, Wait-Time as a Variable in Sex-Related
Differences During Fourth-Grade Mathematics Instruction, 76 J. Eouc. REs. 273 (1983).

HeinOnline -- 14 S. Ill. U. L.J. 538 1989-1990

1990]

Bias in

the Classroom

539

knowing is through narrative. 31 Law is particularly about narrative:
we frequently rely on the case method of instruction; to the extent
that law develops through particularized cases, narrative is the method
of our profession. It is the method of our common law heritage. In
the creation of statutory and regulatory law, a different method is
used: in determining whether a law should be enacted, we have
hearings and evaluate a large body of evidence, much of which may
be statistical and abstract. Case law, however, develops through
individualized facts, particular facts. A case is a story about a
particular conflict at a given time and place, and the law grows out
of a series of these stories. A skillful advocate is one who can make
his or her client the protagonist of the story. With this in mind, we
should pay particular heed to the warning that when women speak
in narrative, we discredit their ideas because of it. Perhaps instead
· we should embrace this mode of talking about the law and build
upon it.
Professor Banks is making an important contribution in obtaining, evaluating and sharing the perception of women and minority
students. The question we must confront as teachers and as· students
is one about the empowerment of students; how do we nurture a
student's sense of confidence such that he or she can participate
skillfully and comfortably in his or her profession?
Response by Leonard. Gross•••

Professor Banks argues a few major points. First, that there is
a gender bias in the classroom; second that this results in women,
particularly women of color, having a second class education; and
finally, ·that we need to take concrete steps to correct the problem.
· · AS to whether there is a gender bias in the classroom, you have
to look at the statistics that Professor Banks makes use of. Like
Professor Adams, I have problems with the absence of observational
data. For example, I was talking to my son the other day, and I
asked him, "How's your teacher?" He said, "Oh, she's great! She's
a terrific teacher." I said, "Why do you think that?" He replied,

31. See, e.g., A. MAclNTYRB, AFTER VIRTUE (2d ed. 1984); Epistemological Crises, Dramatic
Na"ative, and the Philosophy of Science, THE MoNIST 60 (1977); Winter, Transcendental
Nonsense, Metaphoric Reasoning and the Cognitive Stakes for the Law, 137 U. PA. L. REv.
1105 (1989); The Cognitive Dimension of the Agon between Legal Power and Narrative
·
Meaning, 81 MicH. L. REv. 2225 (1989).
••• Associate Professor, Southern Illinois University School of Law; B.A. 1973, State
University of New York at Binghamton; J.D. 1976, Boston University.

HeinOnline -- 14 S. Ill. U. L.J. 539 1989-1990

540

Southern Illinois University Law Journal

[Vol. 14

"Well, she gives me really easy work to do." I said, "Well, that's
interesting." What I am suggesting is that people give responses to
questions and honestly believe them, but they may have other motivations that cause them to believe those particular response~; which
may or may not cause the data to be misleading. I guess the answer
is that we may need more information to know whether or not the
responses are misleading. Even if women are participating less in the
classroom in their third year than in their first year, that could be
attributable to factors unrelated to sexism in the classroom. For
example, a student might decide to participate less in class because
class participation is unrelated to the student's grades.
Another problem with the survey is the finding that at four or
five law schools, "some professors make sexist, racist, homophobic,
or religious comments." What is a "racist" or a "sexist" comment?
What does it mean to say that there are "some" sexist professors? .
How many is "some"? There is a lot of subjectivity in these and
other responses ..
Going beyond the limitations of the survey, I think there is good
reason to conclude that sexism is not rampant in law schools. Most
professors would not intentionally make sexist or offensive statements. Let me tell you why. The fact is that there are a lot of
women in law schools. In fact, women comprise at least 400Jo of the
entering class at the vast majority of ABA-approved law schools. 32
Law schools are run in such a way that law students are able to
generate pressure on faculty members in a number of ways. 33 They
can complain to the dean; 'they can give faculty members bad
evaluations or refuse to sign up for their Classes. The question is,
does a professor want ·to run the risk of incurring the wrath of a
large percentage of his or her class by making offensive comments?
All of these actions could have adverse effects on the faculty member's salary, his or her chances for promotions and various other
perks.
.
On top of that, most professors like to get along with their
students or they most likely would not be in this business. It just
seems strange to me that people would go out of their way to make
comments that are purposely offensive to almost one-half of _their
students; it just doesn't seem altogether rational. Of course, another

32. See A REviEw OP LEOAL EDUCATION FALL 1988, supra note 7, at 4-61. At many schools
·
fully one-half of the entering students are women. See id.
33. See A. D' Amato, The Decline and Fall of Legal Teaching iii the Age of Student
Consumerism, 37 J. LEOAL Eouc. 461 {1987).

HeinOnline -- 14 S. Ill. U. L.J. 540 1989-1990

1990]

Bias in the Classroom

541

explanation is that they do not realize what they are saying. But, at
least in terms of making intentionally offensive remarks, it just does
not seem to be in the faculty member's own self-interest, putting
everything else aside. On the other hand, we should be more concerned about instances of sexual harassment because it is in precisely
these cases that faculty members may be able to advance their own
interests through inappropriate conduct.
The next part of Professor Banks's thesis that I want to address
is, what is the impact of the supposed sexism on students in law
school? Professor Banks argues that women law students are participating less and are alienated. If that were true, then you might
expect to see women doing a lot worse than men in terms of their
academic careers. They would be scoring lower on exams. There is
reason to think that women are not doing as well as men. I don't
really see that kind of alienation, at least in terms of it being
manifested by performance, either in class or on exams.
Assuming, arguendo, that there is a lot of racism and sexism in
the classroom and it is having some impact in terms of giving women
and people of color a second class education,· what do we do about
it? At the University of Michigan, they decided they would pass a
rule forbidding sexist comments, racist comments, forbidding slights
against Vietnam Veterans, and on and on it went. After a while,
they found that the rule so inhibited classroom discussion that it
became extremely difficult to conduct a class. In addition, the ACLU
successfully challenged the university rules on the ground that they
were unconstitutionally overbroad and vague and violated students'
first and fourteenth amendment rights. 34 What I am saying is that
there may be a problem structuring rules in such a way as to limit
what people can say, because there are going to be other significant
losses if you do that.
Also, I think there would be serious problems of academic
freedom involved if we started telling professors that they could not
use the Socratic method because it caused a disproportionately high
number of women law students to be unwilling to participate in class
or because some women perceived themselves to be the victims of
gender bias. The professor might reasonably believe that the best
way to teach his particular materials is through the Socratic method
and then to heap abuse on unprepared students. Although this is not

no

34. Doe v. University of Michigan, 721 F. Supp. 852 (E.D. Mich. 1989).

HeinOnline -- 14 S. Ill. U. L.J. 541 1989-1990

542

Southern Illinois University Law Journal

[Vol. 14

an approach that I prefer, I would be very reluctant to make it
impermissible.
My last point is that the real issue we should be addr~ssing is
tolerance for other people and other people's views. What doncerns
me is that there are both professors and students who are not as
tolerant of other people's views and other people's manner of thinking as they should be. They then proceed to make ad hominem
attacks on the people with whose views or methods they differ. That
is very disturbing.
Professor Banks's Response
Let me just respond. First, I stand by my data and conclusions.
Second, throughout the study that was published, I emphasized that
I am talking about students' perceptions. I am not saying that the
perceptions are accurate perceptions. But I am saying that the perception itself impacts upon the student's ability to learn. And that
we, as teachers, need to be cognizant of that fact, and must try to
change that perception even if it is erroneous.
·
Let me clearly explain to people who have not read the article
and do not know the nature of the questions that the questionnaire
was purposely designed not to let the students know that I was trying
to determine if they thought there was any gender bias. In point· of
fact, the questionnaire had a cover 'sheet which said, "We are doing
a survey of students' attitudes about the classroom climate." It asked
very general questions about the students' perceptions of the climate,
and then proceeded to · compare the differences in responses as
between gender. I came to the · conclusion that the differences ·in
perceptions tended to support some of the anecdotal information
which has been published. 35 All I am saying is that our subsequent
interviews, although a very small sample, and the larger survey results
tend to further substantiate this finding.
What is even more interesting is that the responses to the
questionnaire, when submitted to people of color, both male and
female, seemed to suggest that there is a significant difference in the
perceptions of students of color when compared to white males.

35. See, e.g., J. Elkins, ed., Worlds of Silence: Women In Law School, 8 ALSA F. 1
(1984); Worden, Overshooting the Target: A Feminist Deconstruction of Legal Education, 34
AM. U. L. REv. 1141 (1985); Erickson, Legal Education: The Last Bastion of Sex Bias?, 10
NovA L.J. 457 (1986); Hill, Sexual Bias in the Law School Classroom: One Student's
Perspective, 28 J. LEGAL Eouc. 603 (1988); Bean, The Gender Gap in the Law School
Classroom-Beyond Survival, 14 VT. L. REv. 23 (1989).

HeinOnline -- 14 S. Ill. U. L.J. 542 1989-1990

1990]

Bias in the Classroom

543

As to Professor Gross's comment that alienation, assuming that
it is alienation, does not have a significant effect on female students'
performance, I am saying, "How do we know?" How do we know
if women are performing at their highest level? Perhaps the problem
is that women are doing well, but could do even better if they were
in a more supportive environment.

HeinOnline -- 14 S. Ill. U. L.J. 543 1989-1990

