ll
Perspective

Gender bias in academia: A lifetime
problem that needs solutions
Anaı̈s Llorens,1,39,* Athina Tzovara,1,2,3,39,* Ludovic Bellier,1,40 Ilina Bhaya-Grossman,4,40 Aurélie Bidet-Caulet,5,40
William K. Chang,1,40 Zachariah R. Cross,6,40 Rosa Dominguez-Faus,7,40 Adeen Flinker,8,40 Yvonne Fonken,1,9,40
Mark A. Gorenstein,1,10,40 Chris Holdgraf,1,11,40 Colin W. Hoy,1,40 Maria V. Ivanova,10,40 Richard T. Jimenez,1,40
Soyeon Jun,1,12,40 Julia W.Y. Kam,1,13,40 Celeste Kidd,10,40 Enitan Marcelle,1,40 Deborah Marciano,1,14,40
Stephanie Martin,1,15,40 Nicholas E. Myers,1,16,40 Karita Ojala,17,40 Anat Perry,18,40 Pedro Pinheiro-Chagas,19,40
Stephanie K. Riès,20,40 Ignacio Saez,21,40 Ivan Skelin,22,40 Katarina Slama,1,40 Brooke Staveland,1,14,40
Danielle S. Bassett,23,24,41 Elizabeth A. Buffalo,25,41 Adrienne L. Fairhall,26,41 Nancy J. Kopell,27,41 Laura J. Kray,14,41
Jack J. Lin,28,29,41 Anna C. Nobre,16,41 Dylan Riley,30,41 Anne-Kristin Solbakk,31,32,33,34,41 Joni D. Wallis,1,10,41
Xiao-Jing Wang,35,41 Shlomit Yuval-Greenberg,36,41 Sabine Kastner,37,41,42 Robert T. Knight,1,10,41,42
and Nina F. Dronkers10,38,41,42
1Helen

Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA
for Computer Science, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland
3Sleep Wake Epilepsy Center | NeuroTec, Department of Neurology, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, University Bern, Bern, Switzerland
4Department of Bioengineering, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA
5Brain Dynamics and Cognition Team, Lyon Neuroscience Research Center, CRNL, INSERM U1028, CNRS UMR 5292, University of Lyon,
Lyon, France
6Cognitive and Systems Neuroscience Research Hub, University of South Australia, Adelaide, SA, Australia
7STEPS Program, University of California, Davis, Sacramento, CA, USA
8NYU School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA
9Department of Psychiatry, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
10Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA
11The Berkeley Institute for Data Science, Berkeley, CA, USA
12Department of Brain and Cognitive Science College of Natural Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
13Department of Psychology, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada
14Haas School of Business, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA
15Department of Cognitive Science, University of California, San Diego, San Diego, CA, USA
16Department of Experimental Psychology and Oxford Centre for Human Brain Activity, Department of Psychiatry, Wellcome Centre for
Integrative Neuroimaging, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
17Institute of Systems Neuroscience, Center for Experimental Medicine, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany
18Department of Psychology, the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel
19Laboratory of Behavioral and Cognitive Neuroscience, Stanford Human, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
20School of Speech, Language, and Hearing Sciences and Center for Clinical and Cognitive Neuroscience, San Diego State University, San
Diego, CA, USA
2Institute

(Affiliations continued on next page)

SUMMARY

Despite increased awareness of the lack of gender equity in academia and a growing number of initiatives to
address issues of diversity, change is slow, and inequalities remain. A major source of inequity is gender bias,
which has a substantial negative impact on the careers, work-life balance, and mental health of underrepresented groups in science. Here, we argue that gender bias is not a single problem but manifests as a collection of distinct issues that impact researchers’ lives. We disentangle these facets and propose concrete
solutions that can be adopted by individuals, academic institutions, and society.
INTRODUCTION
The past decades have seen tremendous scientific progress and
astonishing technological advances that not long ago seemed
like science fiction. Yet, such scientific progress stands in stark
contrast to progress in improving the participation of underrepresented groups in academia, particularly in the fields of science,

technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). A report
from the National Institutes of Health (NIH) published in 2017
highlights the gender disparities encountered in science. Out
of 16 NIH directors, only 1 was a woman; in the top 10 research
institutes in the US, the percentage of women with tenure among
all professors was at most 26% and in some cases even below
20%. Women occupied 37% of the NIH intramural research

Neuron 109, July 7, 2021 ª 2021 Elsevier Inc. 2047

ll
Perspective
21Department

of Neurosurgery, University of California Davis, Sacramento, CA, USA
of Neurobiology and Behavior, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA
23Departments of Bioengineering, Electrical & Systems Engineering, Physics & Astronomy, Psychiatry, and Neurology, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA
24Santa Fe Institute, Santa Fe, NM 87501, USA
25Department of Physiology and Biophysics and School of Medicine, Washington National Primate Research Center, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
26Department of Physiology and Biophysics and Computational Neuroscience Center, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA
27Department of Mathematics & Statistics, Boston University, Boston, MA, USA
28Comprehensive Epilepsy Program, Department of Neurology, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA
29Department of Biomedical Engineering, Henry Samueli School of Engineering, Irvine, CA, USA
30Department of Sociology, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720-1980, USA
31Department of Psychology, Oslo University Hospital-Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway
32Department of Neurosurgery, Oslo University Hospital-Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway
33RITMO Centre for Interdisciplinary Studies in Rhythm, Time and Motion, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway
34Department of Neuropsychology, Helgeland Hospital, Mosjøen, Norway
35Center for Neural Science, New York University, 4 Washington Place, New York, NY 10003, USA
36School of Psychological Sciences and Sagol School of Neuroscience, Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv, 6997801 Tel Aviv-Yafo, Israel
37Princeton Neuroscience Institute and Department of Psychology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA
38Department of Neurology, University of California, Davis, Sacramento, CA, USA
39These authors contributed equally
40These authors contributed equally
41Senior author
42These authors contributed equally
*Correspondence: anaisllorens@hotmail.com (A.L.), athina.tz@gmail.com (A.T.)
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2021.06.002
22Department

program tenure-track body, but only 21% attained tenured status, with women of color occupying only 5% of tenured positions
(Addressing gender inequality in the NIH intramural research
program). The numbers show similar trends for PhD programs
in the US. According to the Society for Neuroscience, the percentage of women applicants in PhD programs has increased
in the recent years from 38% in 2000-2001 to 57% in 20162017, with a matriculation rate of 48% for women in 20162017. By contrast, women represented only 30% of all faculty
for PhD programs.
The statistics are similar in Europe. The European Research
Council (ERC; Equality of opportunity in ERC Competitions) reported that only 32% of its panel members and 27% of its
grantees in the Horizon 2020 program were women. In the
Netherlands, 44% of PhDs were awarded to women in 2018,
yet only 22% of the tenured faculty were women. A similar trend
is reported in Switzerland, where close to 40% of fixed-term professorships in 2017 were held by women, but for tenured positions, the fraction of women dropped to 25%.
These statistics confirm the gender disparity that exists in
higher academic positions, despite an almost equal representation across disciplines at earlier career stages (see Gruber et al.,
2020 for a thorough investigation of gender disparities in psychological science). A putative cause of this phenomenon is gender
bias, i.e., prejudice based on gender (encompassing the identity
and the expression of that gender). Gender bias can be explicit or
implicit. Explicit bias is a conscious and intentional evaluation of
a particular entity with some degree of favor or disfavor (Eagly
and Chaiken, 1998). Implicit bias reflects the automatic judgment
of the entity without the awareness of the individual (Greenwald
and Banaji, 1995). These types of bias emerge from different
sources such as stereotypes, prejudice, and discrimination

2048 Neuron 109, July 7, 2021

(Fiske, 1998), which reflect general expectations about members
of a given social group. Gender stereotypes are broadly shared
and reflect differences between women and men in their
perspective and manner of behavior. Importantly, gender stereotypes also impact the way men and women define themselves
and are treated by others, which in turn contributes and perpetuates such stereotypes (see Ellemers, 2018 for review). Gender
bias impacts all women, with even more impact on women
whose gender intersects with other identities that are often
discriminated against, including, but not limited to, race and
ethnicity (see Women in Academia: Quick Take), socioeconomic
status, religion, gender expression, gender identity, sexual orientation, or disabilities (Armstrong and Jovanovic, 2015). Moreover, it has been shown that gender stereotypes influence the
enrollment of women in STEM in many countries (Miller et al.,
2015; Hanson et al., 2017). As such, properly tackling this issue
requires both structural and cultural change. Many of the biases
and solutions presented in this article can apply to and be amplified in other minority groups (see the section Not all gender
biases are the same: Intersectionality below), but a comprehensive assessment of those issues is beyond the scope of this
paper. Indeed, pervasive gender biases do not start at the academic level, but they are deeply rooted in many societies and
even appear early in life, impacting young girls’ career aspirations and lifetime educational achievements (Makarova et al.,
2019). For instance, in many cultures, it is a long-standing stereotype that boys are better at math than girls (Else-Quest
et al., 2010), which, in turn, impacts young girls’ performance
on math tests (Spencer et al., 1999), despite no intrinsic or biological difference (Kersey et al., 2019; Shapiro and Williams,
2012). Parents’ and teachers’ expectations can also show
biases that influence children’s attitudes and performance in

ll
Perspective

Figure 1. Expression of the accumulation of the different facets of gender bias throughout a woman researcher’s career organized
according to when they begin to have an impact
Each line represents one aspect of the gender bias and covers the career stages it is prevalent in. The dot represents the estimated peak in time of a given aspect.

math (Gunderson et al., 2012). This gender stereotyping through
interactions with parents, educators, peers, and the media has a
negative effect on girls’ interest and confidence in their performance in STEM subjects, potentially reducing interest in
research careers in STEM later in life (Cheryan et al., 2015, 2017).
Here, we will focus on gender bias at the university level, which
forms a further bottleneck for gender equity in STEM. The
women-to-men ratio progressively decreases with advancing
degrees and career stages. Despite remarkable progress
made over the last three decades to mitigate gender bias (Eagly,
2018), equity is still far from being reached in academia. Multiple
studies have systematically documented bias in every aspect of
academia (Fernandes et al., 2020), including journal article and
innovation citations (Dworkin et al., 2020b; Hofstra et al.,
2020), publication rates (West et al., 2013), patent applications
(Jensen et al., 2018), hiring decisions (Nielsen, 2016), research
grant applications (Burns et al., 2019), evaluations of conference
abstracts (Knobloch-Westerwick et al., 2013), symposia speaker
invitations (Schroeder et al., 2013), postdoctoral employment
(Sheltzer and Smith, 2014), prestigious science awards (Lunnemann et al., 2019), and tenure decisions (Weisshaar, 2017).
These forms of bias are intertwined and evolve and accumulate
along the career path (see Figure 1). Their combination can lead
to a gradual abandonment of scientific careers by many women,
the numbers of which decrease as career stages progress.
Given the prevalent and deep-rooted nature of gender bias in
academia, we aim to unravel different forms of bias, evaluate
their manifestation over the career span, and provide suggestions toward resolving gender disparity. We explain how pervasive gender bias affects different components, dimensions, and
roles of academics and how these barriers to women’s

advancement differ across each stage of career development.
Our goal is to assemble information regarding the different facets of gender bias in a digestible format for the neuroscientific
community. We aim to launch a discussion around the multifaceted and deeply rooted issues surrounding gender bias in
academia and, in particular, in the field of neuroscience. We
discuss problems faced by women in science, which are often
taking place behind closed doors, providing information and
increased awareness of central issues to academics and institutions seeking a balanced and fair environment. We also
recommend both tested and untested concrete solutions to
help mitigate the negative consequences of bias along three
axes at the individual (i.e., actions we can take as colleagues,
friends, or mentors), institutional (i.e., policies and regulations),
and societal levels (i.e., legislative action concerning society
at large).
Changes in society and culture are often slow and difficult to
implement, but without ongoing awareness, gender equality
cannot be achieved. Solutions to the problem of gender bias
have been difficult to achieve for many reasons, and some
may be more tenable in certain circumstances than others.
Here, we present exemplary policies from progressive institutions that have been effective in alleviating gender bias mostly
in STEM and specifically in neuroscience. We also describe
quantitative tracking tools (Table 1) that contribute to identifying
and mitigating bias. As several manifestations of bias do not yet
have concrete solutions with demonstrated results, we also propose some untested suggestions that may prove useful and
which future research could address (Table 2). It is our hope
that this article will continue the conversation toward resolving
gender bias and bring us closer to tangible results.

Neuron 109, July 7, 2021 2049

ll
Perspective
Table 1. Tools and resources for addressing gender bias in academia
Resource

Career stage

Description

cleanBib

authorship and peer review, citations

tool to probabilistically assign gender
proportions of first/last author pairs in
bibliography entries in neuroscience

PEERE

peer review

development of a protocol aiming to openly
share peer-review data in Europe

Gender balance syllabus toola

teaching

tool to probabilistically assign gender (and
race) of author surnames in course syllabi

EQUIP

early life, teaching

tool for tracking and analyzing patterns in
student participation

Gender bias in recommendation
letters toola

funding and awards, teaching,
hiring and promotions

tool designed to analyze text in
recommendation letters for words
commonly associated with men or women

Negotiation strategies for women: secrets
to success

negotiations

special report on negotiation strategies;
also includes practical advice to create
equitable work cultures

COACh

hiring and promotions,
negotiations

organization dedicated to increasing the
number and success of women in STEM
careers; hosts career building workshops
and distributes training materials

Conference diversity distribution calculator

conferences

tool to compute probabilities of under- and
over-representing minority speakers based
on their overall representation in the field

BiasWatchNeuro

conferences

tool to track speaker diversity at
neuroscience conferences

Respect is part of research

sexual harassment

model for developing peer-led sexual
harassment prevention workshops

Bringing in the Bystander

sexual harassment

in-person program teaching individuals to
prevent and intervene in case of sexual
violence and stalking

Code of conduct templates
for conferences and laboratories

sexual harassment, conferences

instructions, frequently asked questions
(FAQs), and templates for developing a
code of conduct for conferences, events,
and/or research laboratories

List of databases of women and minority
scientists

authorship and peer review,
conferences, intersectionality

List of databases (e.g., Anne’s List, 500
Women Scientists, 500 Queer Scientists,
People of Color Also Know Stuff, Women in
Neuroscience, CompCog.Science, 1000inspiring-black-scientists-in-america) to
find women and underrepresented minority
speakers by field

a

a

These tools are based on probabilistic algorithms that may not always provide accurate estimates, especially in cases with missing or uninformative
data (e.g., initials instead of full surnames or rare surnames). See original publications for limitations.

Gender biases are amplified through career stages
Though gender stereotypes are already strongly shaped in childhood (Makarova et al., 2019), college or university study is a
further bottleneck to gender equity. Even in their first year
beyond high school, women are 1.5 times more likely than men
to leave the STEM higher education pipeline (Ellis et al., 2016).
In more advanced university degrees and career stages, the
women-to-men ratio progressively decreases, referred to as
the ‘‘scissors effect.’’ In most countries, the point where the effect begins is at the start of the university years with equal
numbers of women and men enrolled. The gap widens (like an
open pair of scissors) by the end of the postdoctoral career stage

2050 Neuron 109, July 7, 2021

(European commission report 2015, GARCIA Project). In the US,
the gender gap continues to grow between the postdoctoral and
associate professor years, with women transitioning to principal
investigator positions at an 20% lower rate than men (Lerchenmueller and Sorenson, 2018). Similar data have been reported
for other agencies and countries, highlighting the widening
gender gap across the career stages (Burns et al., 2019; McAllister et al., 2016; Pohlhaus et al., 2011). Although the percentage of
women among undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral researchers has increased in the past few decades,
women remain largely underrepresented in STEM faculty positions (Beede et al., 2011; Field of degree: Women-NSF). Possible

Perspective

Table 2. Summary of the different actions suggested throughout the manuscript to mitigate gender bias by section and level of responsibility
Section

Level

Action

Authorship and
peer review

individual

educate yourself about
these gender issues and
proactively consider how
to adjust your behavior
to ensure equity in your
reviews

institution

alternatives to single-blind
peer-review system

Citations

Tested and
recommended

Tested and
debated

Implemented

Select
advocates

–

–

–

–

U

Schrouff et al., 2019; Tomkins et al., 2017;
Rodgers, 2017; Mulligan et al., 2013;
Budden et al., 2008; Snodgrass, 2006;
Bernard, 2018; double-blind review
currently offered by a few major academic
journals, such as eNeuro, Current
Sociology, Social Science & Medicine,
Behavioral Ecology (not a comprehensive
list); open peer review as currently
implemented in Frontiers journals
U

Schrouff et al., 2019; Squazzoni et al., 2017;
Helmer et al., 2017, Murray et al., 2019;
implemented by Progress in Neurobiology,
eLife, Nature Publishing Group, Cell Press

for review and editorial
panels, make authors’
and reviewers’ demographic
information publicly accessible

U

Schrouff et al., 2019; Squazzoni et al., 2017;
Murray et al., 2019; Helmer et al., 2017;
implemented by Cell Press, eLife

–

–

U

Murray et al., 2019; Schrouff et al., 2019;
Squazzoni et al., 2017; Helmer et al., 2017;
implemented by Progress in Neurobiology,
Nature Neuroscience

journal submission website
to automatically notify authors
of an unbalanced citation list;
editors to require written
exception requests for sharply
unbalanced citations

U

Dworkin et al., 2020a, 2020b; Zhou et al.,
2020; see Table 1 for more details

Increase maximum allowable
references, or eliminate limits

U

implemented by Neuron, Frontiers journals,
Brain, Human Brain Mapping, PLOS One

individual

review your citation list for
evidence of bias before
submission

–

institutional

increase diversity of review
and editorial panels

U

development of new citation
metrics that account for
gender bias and self-citation

–

U

the m-index (Cameron et al., 2016)

(Continued on next page)

ll

Neuron 109, July 7, 2021 2051

diversify editorial and
referee pools

Continued
Tested and
recommended

Tested and
debated

Implemented

Select
advocates

support mentees and
colleagues in applying for
career transition awards,
such as NIH K awards or
the Burroughs-Wellcome
career award

–

–

–

–

funding agencies to set and
publish targets for grant
applicants, success rates,
and amounts awarded

U

U

Schrouff et al., 2019; Niederle et al., 2013;
Balafoutas and Sutter, 2012; implemented
by Max Planck Institute and the Australian
National Health and Research Council

create funding mechanisms
awarded exclusively on the
merit of the scientific proposal,
regardless of the merit of the
principal investigator (PI)

U

U

Witteman et al., 2019; implemented by
Canadian Institutes of Health Research

alerting review committee to
potential gender bias and
possibly prefacing grant
reviews with bias training

U

U

Carnes et al., 2015; Devine et al., 2017; Fine
et al., 2014; Smith et al., 2015; Valantine
et al., 2014

U

Choudhury & Aggarwal, 2020; Charlesworth
and Banaji, 2019; implemented by National
Science Foundation, National Institutes of
Health, the US Department of Agriculture,
the European Research Council

–

–

U

Stark and Freishtat, 2014; Peterson et al.,
2019; Blair et al., 2001

U

Stark and Freishtat, 2014;
University of California, Berkeley Statistics
Department

Section

Level

Action

Funding and awards

individual

institutional

make the demographics
information of former grantees
accessible to the public

Teaching

individual

use tools such as those described
in Table 1 to build your syllabi and
check it for gender bias; include
historical example of successful
women scientists

–

institutional

change the language of prompts in
the student evaluations of teaching (SETs)
and remind them of their own
internal biases before having students
fill out evaluations

U

(Continued on next page)

Perspective

abandon SETs as primary measure
of teaching effectiveness; implement
assessments such as classroom
observation and examining
teaching materials and portfolios

–

ll

2052 Neuron 109, July 7, 2021

Table 2.

Perspective

Table 2.

Continued
Tested and
debated

Implemented

Select
advocates

individuals hiring for any
position (lab manager, grad
student, faculty search
committee) should familiarize
themselves with best,
equitable hiring practices

–

–

–

Bergman et al., 2013

mandatory bias training for
member of hiring committees

U

U

Carnes et al., 2015; Schrouff et al., 2019;
Fine et al., 2014; implemented by University
of California and University of WisconsinMadison

increase the diversity in search
committees and compensate
women and other minority
groups for this commitment
by reducing teaching load or
other administrative duties

U

U

Schrouff et al., 2019; Bergman and Rustad,
2013; Smith et al., 2004; Zinovyeva and
Bagues, 2011

universities offer financial
incentives to departments
with diverse representation

U

U

Bergman and Rustad, 2013; https://www.
nature.com/articles/d41586-019-00919-y

additional qualification criteria
centered on outreach, knowledge
dissemination, faculty service,
and diversity, equity, and inclusion efforts

U

Moher et al., 2018

maintain a list of underrepresented
minority mentees that could become
targets for job searches
and awards (as is done for
conference speakers)

U

Anne’s List, 500 Women Scientists, 500
Queer Scientists, People of Color Also
Know Stuff, Women in Neuroscience,
CompCog.Science 1000-inspiring-blackscientists-in-america

include mediators from equity
committees to participate
through the hiring/promotion
procedure

U

Gender Monitoring ‒ Egalité - EPFL

set concrete targets for number
of female applicants based on the
number of women working in that
field; if targets are not met, require
the post to be re-announced

U

Implemented by University of California,
Berkeley Psychology

U

Switzerland, Sweden, and Germany

Level

Action

Hiring, tenure, and promotions

individual

institutional

societal

when legally possible, academic
institutions can set policies on
gender equity, set goals for gender
ratios in different position categories,
and develop recruitment strategies
to achieve these goals

U

ll

Neuron 109, July 7, 2021 2053

Tested and
recommended

Section

(Continued on next page)

Continued
Tested and
recommended

Tested and
debated

Level

Action

Financial
negotiations

institutional

institutions publish salary
data for all faculty, as well
as possible salaries per level

U

Conferences

individual

be an active bystander;
speak out against
harassment and other
biased behaviors

–

–

–

–

when organizing conference,
seminar, and symposiums,
consult resources such as the
directory compiled by Jennifer
Glass and Minda Monteagudo,
which lists searchable databases
of highly qualified women by
subfield (Table 1) to ensure
equitable balance of speakers

–

–

–

–

consider turning down speaking
opportunities at conferences with
an imbalanced speaker lineup

–

–

–

–

affirmative attention for council
positions, where some positions are
required to be filled by women (can
be extended to include Black, Indigenous
and people of color-only
positions, as well)

U

U

Tzovara et al., 2021; implemented
by OHBM

conferences can require the inclusion
of both men and women speakers or
provide a justification for single-gender
symposia

U

implemented by Federation of European
Neuroscience Societies (FENS) Forum

conferences to offer sessions and
workshops to raise awareness around
bias and the best ways to eliminate it;
these sessions should be open to all
genders

U

implemented by OHBM, FENS, SFN,
Gordon Research Conferences

conferences required to have a
code of conduct

U

Parsons, 2015; Marts, 2017; Favaro et al.,
2016; implemented at SFN, Cognitive
Neuroscience Society (CNS), Social &
Affective Neuroscience Society (SANS),
Cosyne

code of conduct includes clear
plans of action in the case of
harassment

U

Parsons, 2015; Marts, 2017; Favaro et al.,
2016; implemented at SFN

institutional

Mazei et al., 2015; required by all public
institutions in the US

Parsons, 2015; Marts, 2017; Favaro
et al., 2016;
(Continued on next page)

Perspective

code of conduct includes the
procedure for removing confirmed
harassers

Implemented

Select
advocates

Section

ll

2054 Neuron 109, July 7, 2021

Table 2.

Perspective

Table 2.

Continued
Tested and
debated

Implemented

Select
advocates

organizational leaders
display an unequivocal
anti-harassment
stance

–

–

–

–

be an active bystander;
speak out against
harassment and other
biased behaviors

–

–

–

–

sexual harassment
to be equated to
scientific misconduct,
including similar
mechanisms for
reporting, investigation,
and adjudication;
this includes barring
research found guilty
of sexual harassment
from applying for new
grants

U

Greider et al., 2019;
The NIH is currently implementing this
change

universities to develop
programs, distinct from
and complementary to
legal procedures (e.g., Title
IX in the US), which are
charged with serving the
survivors of sexual
harassment, preventing
new cases, and training
the university-wide
community

U

University of California, Berkeley

U

Buchanan et al., 2014; Katz and Moore,
2013; Cares et al., 2015; Potter and
Moynihan, 2011

Level

Action

Sexual harassment

individual

institutional

mandatory sexual
harassment
trainings

U

(Continued on next page)

ll

Neuron 109, July 7, 2021 2055

Tested and
recommended

Section

Continued
Tested and
debated

Implemented

Select
advocates

consider delays caused by parenthood and
childcare responsibilities when evaluating
candidates for positions, promotions,
grants, and awards

–

–

–

–

provide affordable on-site childcare

U

U

(Eckerson et al., 2016; Morrissey 2017);
50% of colleges in the University of
California system offer some type of
child care

extend eligibility window for grants and
awards based on parental leave

U

NIH K awards, ERC grants, Emmy Noether
Program, and the Research Project for
Young Talent, French Young researcher
ANR (Agence Nationale de la
Recherche) grant

adopt official extensions of graduate,
postdoctoral, and tenure timelines due to
childbirth and parenthood

U

implemented by Norwegian Research
Council, European Research Council

enable ‘‘couple hiring’’ for tenure-track
positions

U

Schiebinger et al., 2008 implemented on a
case-by-case basis

create travel funds for academic parents to
attend conferences

U

(Calisi and a Working Group of Mothers in
Science, 2018); Langin 2018; Hope et al.,
2019; implemented FENS, OHBM

conferences should be equipped with
nursing rooms and on-site childcare

U

Cardel et al., 2020; Langin, 2018; Hope
et al., 2019; implemented by Society for
Neuroscience (SFN)

provide funds for relocation

U

included in some offer letters on a case-bycase basis

provide bridge funds at department and
university level to support trainees during
gaps in funding, especially during
parental leave

U

Stewart and Valian, 2018; Schiebinger et al.,
2008; implemented by University of
Washington, University of California San
Francisco

U

Jones and Wilcher, 2019; implemented by
all countries except for Papua New Guinea
and the US; individual universities, like
Boston University, have paid parental leave
for graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers

Level

Action

Family planning

individual

institutional

societal

increase the minimum allotted time for
parental leave

U

Each action is classified by its current status (tested/recommended, tested/debated, or implemented) and supported by some examples of highlighted advocates. Note that many solutions for
the individual are difficult to quantify and left blank.

Perspective

Tested and
recommended

Section

ll

2056 Neuron 109, July 7, 2021

Table 2.

ll
Perspective
factors contributing to the increasing gender gap as careers
progress will be reviewed in the following sections, where we
will disentangle the various aspects contributing to each factor
and propose concrete solutions to close the gender gap.
Gender bias hinders scientific productivity, authorship,
and peer review
Women are systematically underrepresented as first and last
authors in peer-reviewed publications relative to the proportion
of women scientists in the field (Dworkin et al., 2020b; West
et al., 2013). The discrepancy is particularly evident for senior
author positions, as well as single-authored papers and
commissioned editorials, i.e., positions typically reflective of
senior roles (Holman et al., 2018; Schrouff et al., 2019; West
et al., 2013). Moreover, an overall increase in gender differences in productivity has accompanied the steady increase of
women in STEM over the past decades. This difference in productivity between men and women is mostly explained by a
higher female than male dropout rate, while the yearly difference in productivity between genders is relatively small (Huang
et al., 2020). Furthermore, a study of peer review based on 145
journals in various fields reported that women submit fewer papers than men (Squazzoni et al., 2021). The underrepresentation of women increases with the impact factor of the journal
(Bendels et al., 2018). Neuroscience is no exception, as women
authors are less likely to submit to high-profile journals,
including senior women. In 2016, only 20% of neuroscience
papers sent to Nature had a woman as corresponding author
(Promoting diversity in neuroscience, 2018). But even when
women do submit to such journals, they face gender bias.
Indeed, several studies where the identity of the authors was
experimentally manipulated demonstrated that conference abstracts, papers, and fellowship applications were rated as having higher merit when they were supposedly written by men.
These effects were even stronger in scientific fields viewed as
more ‘‘masculine’’ (Knobloch-Westerwick et al., 2013; Krawczyk and Smyk, 2016). Furthermore, a recent study of 9,000
editors and 43,000 reviewers from Frontiers journals demonstrated that women are underrepresented as editors and peer
reviewers (Helmer et al., 2017). This gender imbalance has
also been reported in the editorial board of the top 50 journals
in psychology and neuroscience (Palser et al., 2021). Additionally, all editors, regardless of whether they are men or women,
display a same-gender preference (homophily), which at the
moment favors men, in part because there are more men in
the field (Murray et al., 2019).
In addition to publications, a screening of 2.7 million US patent applications indicated that there was also discrimination in
the patent-review process, leading to relatively few approved
patent applications registered by women inventors (Jensen
et al., 2018). Many of these effects were larger in fields with a
generally higher representation of women, such as life sciences,
than in technology areas (Hunt et al., 2013; Sugimoto et al., 2015;
Whittington and Smith-Doerr, 2008). Though gender bias in
authorship has been explicitly acknowledged for years (Women
in neuroscience: a numbers game, 2006), it has changed minimally over the last decade (Bendels et al., 2018; Holman et al.,
2018; 2018). Although the publication gap is decreasing, it is

wrong to assume that there will be a proportional representation
anytime soon without further active interventions (Bendels et al.,
2018). In some disciplines, such as math, computer science, and
surgery, gender parity in publications is unlikely to be reached in
this century due to the current slow rates of increased representation of women (Holman et al., 2018). Other fields, such as psychology, have seen relatively greater increases in publications by
men authors over time, further widening the gender gap (Ceci
et al., 2014). Given that publishing, particularly in high-profile
journals, is critical for hiring decisions and career advancement,
this inequality in authorship will continue to contribute to the
increasing gender disparity across academic ranks (Fairhall
and Marder, 2020).
Suggestions for decreasing gender bias at an
individual level
Increasing awareness for all scientists, editors, and reviewers
regarding gender bias in authorship could help mitigate this
issue. All scientists could seek out education in gender bias
and proactively consider how to adjust their own behavior to
ensure equity in their reviews.
Suggestions for decreasing gender bias at the
institutional level
Finding alternatives to single-blind review is needed to increase
the transparency of the peer-review process (Barroga, 2020; Lee
et al., 2013). One proposed solution to mitigate gender bias in the
review process is adoption of double-blind review, hiding the authors’ name (Rodgers, 2017). Double-blind review has been
introduced in several fields, such as ecology and computational
sciences, and has been successful in reducing biases due to
geographic location or university reputation (Bernard, 2018;
Budden et al., 2008; Mulligan et al., 2013; Snodgrass, 2006;
Tomkins et al., 2017). It is also standard usage in the top journals
in sociology, political science, and history and was introduced in
some neuroscientific journals such as eNeuro. However, the efficacy of double-blind review in reducing gender bias is still unclear. An early study found that introducing double-blind peer
review significantly increased the number of first-authored papers by women (Budden et al., 2008), whereas later studies
found no effect on review gender bias (Cox and Montgomerie,
2019; Tomkins et al., 2017). It is possible that more recent blind
reviews were compromised by the use of preprint servers that list
authors’ full names. Another proposed solution is an open peer
review, as currently implemented in Frontiers journals, where
the names of the authors and the editor and reviewers are
made public upon publications. One last alternative would be a
hybrid peer-review system combining open discussion between
scientists and peers while preserving the anonymity of the latter
(Bravo et al., 2019; Lee et al., 2013). Such a system could consist
of a pre- or post-publication discussion platform that allows referees, editors, and authors to interact when providing feedback
on a paper.
Importantly, academic journals need to pay attention to potential sources of gender bias in order to be able to identify ways to
mitigate them. One way to encourage review and editorial panels
to improve accountability and transparency is to make demographic information regarding authors and reviewers publicly
accessible (Murray et al., 2019). This is already implemented
by PEERE, an European protocol designed to be an equitable

Neuron 109, July 7, 2021 2057

ll
Perspective
way to get more data on the peer-review process (Table 1;
Squazzoni et al., 2017). Moreover, an increasing number of publishing groups are publicly releasing statements in support of diversity in authors, citations, and/or referees. As a recent
example, Cell Press is encouraging authors to evaluate their citation lists for biases, as well as to ensure diversity in their research
participants, authors, and collaborators (Sweet, 2021). It is also
the case for eLife, which sets a twice-yearly report about actions
taken to improve transparency, promote equity, diversity, and inclusion in the publishing process, as well as in their editorial
board. Such initiatives are setting a positive example that could
be followed by more publishers across all academic fields.
Gender differences in the number of citations
Citation metrics have emerged as a critical index of productivity
in the biological and cognitive sciences. Citation counts influence hiring and tenure decisions, grant awards, speaker invitations, and career recognition. As an example, a study in the field
of astronomy showed that in 149,000 publications, a paper
whose lead author was a woman received 10% fewer citations
on average than similar papers with a man as leading author (Caplar et al., 2017). In top neuroscience journals, that number is
even greater; papers with women as first and last authors receive
30% fewer citations than expected given the number of such papers in the field (Dworkin et al., 2020b).
Furthermore, recent research reveals that contemporary citation practices skew these metrics in favor of men, undervaluing
woman-led research of equivalent quality and potential impact.
In particular, men undercite women scientists relative to men scientists, and their rates of self-citation are higher than those of
women (Dworkin et al., 2020b; King et al., 2017). Additionally,
men are more likely to use promotional language, such as positive words (e.g., ‘‘unprecedented’’ or ‘‘excellent’’) in the title or
abstract, which in turn leads to more citations and an inflation
of the h-index (Cameron et al., 2016; Kelly and Jennions, 2006;
Lerchenmueller et al., 2019; Woolston, 2020). It is also possible
that citation bias is exacerbated by the use of social media platforms such as Twitter. A recent randomized controlled trial demonstrates that papers that were tweeted received more citations
at the end of 1 year than papers that were not tweeted (Luc et al.,
2021). Women academics have disproportionately fewer Twitter
followers, ‘‘likes,’’ and re-tweets than men academics, controlling for their social media activity levels and professional rank
(Zhu et al., 2019).
Suggestions at the individual level
At the individual level, all authors should be more aware of which
articles they cite in their work. In particular, articles that already
have a high number of citations are seen as ‘‘seminal,’’ thus
exacerbating biases that may not reflect quality. In the case of
multiple possible citations, they should seek to balance the number of citations between genders according to a chosen model of
research ethics. In the distributional model, citations would be
distributed in a manner that is proportional to the percentages
in their field, while in a diversity model, citations would be distributed in a manner that seeks to proactively counteract a history of
inequality (Dworkin et al., 2020a, 2020b). Practically, efforts to
diversify one’s reference list can be supported by algorithmic
tools that now exist to predict the gender of the first and last au-

2058 Neuron 109, July 7, 2021

thors of each reference by using databases that store the probability of a name being carried by a woman (Zhou et al., 2020).
This tool already exists in neuroscience (Table 1), and we recommend wide implementation across academic fields.
Suggestions at the institutional level
One proposed solution is to increase diversity in review and
editorial panels (Murray et al., 2019), as implemented by Progress in Neurobiology and eLife, among other journals. As a
notable example, Progress in Neurobiology, has an editorial
board with 80% women associate editors. This can help mitigate
bias but may not be sufficient, as even women might be biased
against other women. One option is to develop alternative citation metrics that account for the influence of self-citation and
gender bias. Examples of these metrics are the m-index, which
is the h-index adjusted for career age, and the m(Q)-index, which
adjusts for career age and excludes self-citations (Cameron
et al., 2016).
We also suggest that journal editors incorporate existing
quantitative tools that analyze the gender ratio of a reference
list by probabilistically inferring the gender of authors in a list of
citations (see Table 1). Journals could then require authors to
either eliminate any possible bias or provide a detailed justification for their deviation from the expected distribution. We also
recommend the implementation of additional algorithmic tools
in scientific journal submission websites to identify under-cited
articles by women authors in a subfield or notify authors of citation biases in their submissions. Lastly, journal editors could
consider increasing limits on the number of citations to accelerate the diversification of reference lists. As an example, Neuron
modified their guidelines to exclude reference sections from the
maximum character limit in research article submissions.
Scientific funding and awards are heavily biased
Funding is crucial to a researcher’s scientific progression and
career advancement, including gaining tenure and broad professional recognition (Charlesworth and Banaji, 2019; Duch et al.,
2012). While the funding landscape is slowly evolving toward
gender parity, women still face substantial challenges as they
compete for limited resources. Some funding agencies collect
data on the distribution of funding across genders. For instance,
the percentage of NIH research grants awarded to women has
been steadily growing over the past two decades, increasing
from 23% in 1998 to 34% in 2019 (NIH Data Book—Data by
Gender, 2020), with similar patterns observed for the National
Science Foundation (NSF), the United States Department of
Agriculture, and the European Research Council (ERC) (Charlesworth and Banaji, 2019; ERC consolidator grants 2019 statistics, 2019). However, despite this positive trend, progress
still needs to be made, as women scientists typically hold fewer
grants and receive smaller awards compared to men scientists
(NIH Data Book—Data by Gender, 2020).
Interestingly, while women receive more NIH research career
grants at an early career stage than men (54%), the percentage
of grants awarded to women progressively drops for grants
associated with later career stages (research project grants,
34%; research center grants, 26%; NIH Data Book—Data by
Gender, 2020. Similar data have been reported for other
agencies and countries, highlighting the widening gender gap

ll
Perspective
across career stages; women are awarded fewer larger grants
and are less likely to have them renewed than men (Burns
et al., 2019; McAllister et al., 2016). Possible factors contributing
to this increasing gender gap might be publication and citation
practices, family circumstances, and other barriers resulting
from implicit and explicit gender stereotypes (Pohlhaus et al.,
2011). Moreover, the percentage of women submitting research
grant proposals as a principal investigator (PI) is less than expected relative to their representation in all fields but engineering
(Rissler et al., 2020).
The funding gap is also apparent in the amount awarded, with
men typically asking for more funds (Waisbren et al., 2008) and
obtaining larger grants than women (National Institutes of Health,
2020). A recent study found a median gender disparity in NIH
funding of $39,000 per year awarded to first-time principal investigators, while no significant differences by gender were found in
the performance measures (i.e., median number of articles published per year, median number of citations per article, and the
number of areas of research expertise in published articles prior
to their first NIH grant; Oliveira et al., 2019). The differences were
even more pronounced for funding acquired by investigators at
prominent US universities (median gender difference, $82,000).
Although the gender gap is smaller regarding R01 awards (median difference, $16,000), men receive more of them (after controlling for other performance measures; National Institutes of
Health, 2020; Pohlhaus et al., 2011). Furthermore, data from
the NIH also show that the most dramatic differences in funding
amounts were observed for research center grants (average difference, $476,000), again highlighting increasing disparity at
later career stages.
Although the proportion of women who receive career
awards for their scientific contributions has steadily increased
over the past decades, women still receive substantially fewer
prizes than men and less money (Ma et al., 2019). Across 13
major STEM disciplines, only 17% of professional award winners were women (Lincoln et al., 2012). This number is lower
than expected based on overall representation by women in
the STEM fields (38% for junior faculty and 27% for senior faculty), likely indicating review bias with professional efforts and
accomplishments of women not receiving the same recognition. Gender disparity is even more dramatic for more prestigious awards. For instance, women represent only 21% of
Kavli Prize winners, 14% of recipients for the National Medal
of Science, 3% for the Nobel Prize in Chemistry, 3% for the
Fields Medal in Mathematics, and 1% for the Nobel Prize in
Physics (Charlesworth and Banaji, 2019; RAISE Project,
2018).The year 2020 was a unique year in Nobel Prizes, with
two women winning the prize for Chemistry and one woman
the prize for Physics. Despite this positive step, gender equity
is still lacking, and active efforts need to be continued to ensure
that women will keep being represented in prestigious awards
in the years to come. Gender bias in distinguished recognition
perpetuates the falsehood that only men can aspire to the highest levels of academic achievement, thus sending a harmful
message to younger generations of aspiring scientists. Furthermore, disparities in funding and recognition tend to have a subsequent snowball effect. Indeed, grant funding drives scientific
productivity, which in turn drives promotions; promotions drive

increases in salaries and stature, and stature drives recognition. Gender bias at each of these collective steps serves to
further hamper the advancement of women in their academic
careers.
Suggestions at the individual level
The process of applying for certain career transition awards
across scientific disciplines, such as NIH K awards or the Burroughs-Wellcome career award, forces both the applicant and
the mentor to envision the candidate in the role of a faculty member, something that can have a profound effect on the candidate’s internal model of self and the attitude of the mentor.
Suggestions at the institutional level
Solutions could emerge directly from funding agencies in all scientific disciplines if they commit to actively monitoring for gender
differences and ensuring gender equity in grant application
rates, success rates, and amounts awarded. To ensure fairer
funding, we suggest that agencies introduce a gender target
for grant applicants, success rates, and amounts awarded.
This could consist of a defined percentage of women researchers or amount of funding allocated to them at different
career stages. Crucially, funding agencies should hold themselves accountable for attracting more female applicants by
changing the procedures used in their competitions to create
more equitable outcomes (Niederle, 2017; Niederle and Vesterlund, 2011). Further, it has been shown that having a target representation among women leads to increased numbers of applications by women; this brings stronger candidates to the
competition, with little reverse discrimination (i.e., discrimination
in favor of women; Niederle et al., 2013). Importantly, in contrast
to some affirmative action approaches, this approach preserves
the performance and quality of the competition (Balafoutas and
Sutter, 2012).
This step could be enhanced by alerting the committee to potential gender bias (that both male and female reviewers are susceptible to) and even prefacing grant reviews with bias training.
In addition, women are particularly underrepresented as leaders
on large projects and/or international collaborations, and adjusting this imbalance could help establish overall gender equity in
research funding. Finally, the Canadian Institutes of Health
Research have successfully increased the number of female
grant recipients by creating funding mechanisms that dispense
awards focusing on the merit of the scientific proposal instead
of the merit of the principal investigator (Witteman et al., 2019).
Moreover, monitoring implicit bias by making the demographics information of former grantees accessible to funding
committees could help pinpoint the disparities and distribute
the resources more equitably (Choudhury and Aggarwal,
2020). To reduce bias in the amount of requested funding, we
suggest that submission portals implement artificial intelligence
tools to provide researchers with recommendations on amounts
of funding given their career stage and type of research. This
suggestion follows the findings of Bowles and colleagues, who
have shown that women ask for as much as men when ambiguity
about bargaining range is reduced (Bowles et al., 2005).
Importantly, department chairs and deans must commit to an
equitable distribution of institutional resources across genders.
Additionally (but not as an alternative), department chairs could
actively encourage, support, and provide the means (e.g., through

Neuron 109, July 7, 2021 2059

ll
Perspective
release time or workshops) to all faculty members to pursue applications for career awards and large grants such as program projects and center grant funding (see gender equity guidelines for
department chairs).
Teaching evaluations reflect biases and gender-role
expectations
Gender biases are ubiquitous in the classroom, affecting both
the students and their professors (Fan et al., 2019). At the student
level, what professors integrate in their course syllabi shapes
students’ knowledge and perception of academia. Women are
under-cited as well as under-assigned in syllabi; 82% of assigned readings in graduate training in international relations
across 42 US universities are written by all-men authors (Colgan,
2017), and only 15 of the 200 most frequently assigned works in
the section ‘‘politics’’ of the Open Syllabus Project are authored
by at least one woman (Sumner, 2018).
At the professor level, large-scale studies have found that
women instructors receive lower-than-average scores on their
student evaluations in comparison to men and that gender
bias can be so substantial that more effective instructors are
rated lower than less effective ones (Mengel et al., 2018). These
findings have been substantiated in experimental studies,
where the gender identity of the instructor in online courses
was manipulated, with the instructors receiving lower ratings
from both male and female students when they were believed
to be women (Khazan et al., 2019; MacNell et al., 2015). Men
are perceived by all genders to be more knowledgeable and
to have stronger leadership skills than their women counterparts (Boring, 2017), even when there are no actual differences
in what students have learned. This bias toward masculine traits
during student evaluations of teaching (SETs) can have an
important impact on the career of women scientists, as it is
commonly used as a measurement of teaching effectiveness
for promotion and tenure decisions. Apart from bias in the
perception of women as teachers, women also tend to have
higher teaching loads compared to men and less time for
research (Misra et al., 2011), which can negatively impact their
research productivity.
Suggestions at the individual level
We propose the use of existing tools (Reinholz and Shah, 2018;
see Table 1) that can help faculty to build their syllabi and bibliographies in a more gender-balanced way (Sumner, 2018). In
particular, faculty could provide historical examples of successful women scientists to reinforce female role models, ensure that
the resources they give to their students are gender balanced
(Table 1), and use more inclusive language (i.e., ‘‘folks’’ instead
of ‘‘guys’’; Bigler and Leaper, 2015).
Suggestions at the institutional level
The necessity to improve fairness and objectivity in teaching
evaluations is critical to balance the odds for promotion across
genders. A study conducted at the University of California, Berkeley suggested abandoning the SETs as the principal measure
of teaching effectiveness and implementing instead other types
of assessment, such as observing the teaching and examining
teaching materials and portfolios (Stark and Freishtat, 2014).
Moreover, improvement in the phrasing of the SETs is also
required. Simple changes to the language used (e.g., explicitly

2060 Neuron 109, July 7, 2021

asking students to be aware of their biases) had a positive
impact on the assessment of women professors (Peterson
et al., 2019). Prefacing SETs with counter-stereotype content
could further decrease bias that is evident during the evaluation
itself (Blair et al., 2001).
Academic hiring, tenure decisions, and promotions
favor men
Evaluation criteria for hiring and promotion commonly used in
academia are also susceptible to gender inequality. These
biases are common across all hiring stages, encompassing lab
manager positions (Moss-Racusin et al., 2012), postdoctoral fellowships (Sheltzer and Smith, 2014), and tenure-track positions
(Steinpreis et al., 1999).
Strikingly, despite experimental and observable data in
STEM fields reporting favorability toward women in hiring decisions compared to equally qualified men, women remain
heavily underrepresented in tenure-track positions (National
Research Council, 2009; Williams and Ceci, 2015). This
discrepancy has multiple potential sources related to different
dimensions of gender bias. Gender biases in recruitment can
occur even before applicants are evaluated (Nielsen, 2016).
In neuroscience and STEM in general, most departmental or
unit leaders are men (Gupta et al., 2005; McCullough, 2019).
Consequently, men are more likely than women to define the
unit’s strategic research foci and/or teaching needs, draft
the job profile, and outline the announcement, thereby determining the focus of the search. Defining a profile in a broad
or narrow manner directly impacts the number and quality of
eligible candidates. Narrow profiles can be used to legitimize
the selection of a specific candidate (van den Brink, 2010)
and often penalize women, as men’s social networks benefit
from a higher proportion of scientific leaders (Greguletz
et al., 2019; James et al., 2019). The practice of some academic institutions limiting open recruitments presents an
added barrier for women. A study in Denmark showed that
at the University of Aarhus, 20% of associate and full professor positions were filled via a closed recruitment procedure
(Nielsen, 2015); such procedures are likely to propagate
bias, as closed recruitment frequently results in a single applicant (Nielsen, 2015).
The evaluation and selection phase of the hiring process contributes to the persistence of gender imbalance (Rivera, 2017).
Since men continue to be overrepresented among tenured/
tenure-track faculty, evaluation committees and interview panels
tend to have skewed gender composition (Sheltzer and Smith,
2014). Gender bias during hiring is amplified by the role of ‘‘elite’’
male faculty, who employ fewer women in their labs and have a
disproportionate effect on training the next generation of faculty;
these processes in turn affect hiring at high-ranking research universities (Sheltzer and Smith, 2014). Moreover, studies performed in Italian and Spanish academic institutions across
several scientific fields show that when promotion committees
are composed exclusively of men, women are less likely to get
promoted (De Paola and Scoppa, 2015). Each additional woman
on a seven-member promotion committee increased the number
of women promoted to full professor by 14% (Zinovyeva and
Bagues, 2011). Another important factor in reducing gender

ll
Perspective
bias in committee decisions is committee member awareness of
implicit bias. Indeed, as shown in a recent study in France conducted across scientific disciplines, committee members who
believe that women face external barriers in their performance
and evaluation are less biased toward selecting men (Régner
et al., 2019).
The biases that affect search criteria also influence the evaluation of the applicant’s curriculum vitae. When faculty believe the
applicant to be a man, they tend to evaluate the curriculum vitae
(CV) more favorably and are more likely to hire the applicant
(Moss-Racusin et al., 2012; Steinpreis et al., 1999) than when
faculty believe the applicant to be a woman. Consequently,
only women with extraordinary applications tend to be considered, narrowing the pool of potential women candidates to be interviewed.
Another source of bias during hiring comes from recommendation letters. Their content and quality significantly differ based
on the gender of the applicant (Dutt et al., 2016; Madera et al.,
2009; Schmader et al., 2007). For example, letters in support
of women are typically shorter, raise more doubts, and include
fewer ‘‘standout’’ adjectives (e.g., superb or brilliant) and more
‘‘endeavor’’ adjectives (e.g., hardworking or diligent), regardless
of the gender of the recommender. Altogether, subtle gender
biases throughout the academic hiring process, from job posting
to evaluation, increase the risk of creating self-reinforcing cycles
of gender inequality (van den Brink et al., 2010; Nielsen, 2015).
Suggestions at the individual level
We recommend that individuals writing job announcements be
made aware concerning gender bias issues both explicit and implicit. Individuals evaluating applications should also be trained
on topics relevant to gender equity, gender bias, and bias mitigation (Bergman and Rustad, 2013).
Suggestions at the institutional level
Bias awareness workshops could help scientists to improve job
advertisements and assess applications more objectively
(Carnes et al., 2015; Schrouff et al., 2019). This approach is
already in place in some academic institutions (e.g., the University of California system) and could be more widely adopted and
made mandatory for all academic members. The University of
Wisconsin-Madison has successfully increased diversity by implementing workshops for faculty search committees that raise
awareness about unconscious bias and provide evidence-based
solutions to counter the problem (Fine et al., 2014). These types
of workshops can be broadly implemented across institutions
and fields. Finally, numerous studies show that reminding evaluators of their internal biases at the evaluation stage of the hiring
process reduces the impact of bias (Carnes et al., 2015; Devine
et al., 2017; Smith et al., 2015; Valantine et al., 2014).
Efforts should also be made to increase diversity in search
committees. Increasing representation of women is necessary
for reducing bias (Schrouff et al., 2019; Smith et al., 2004),
despite not being sufficient on its own (see discussion). At the
same time, institutions should ensure that women in underrepresented departments are not overloaded with administrative obligations, time-consuming committees, or any other assignment
tasks that do not enhance promotion prospects (Babcock
et al., 2017). To increase diversity in search committees while
not overworking women, we propose that members of search

committees be compensated by reducing their teaching or other
administrative duties. Importantly, we highlight the strong need
for male allies as part of search committees (see discussion).
Some academic institutions have already introduced mediators from equity committees in the hiring/promotion procedure.
For example, in Switzerland, such mediators are required to
actively provide input in faculty hiring and monitor gender balance (Gender Monitoring_Egalité_EPFL). Although nonacademic advisors cannot judge the quality of scientific work, their
input on the fairness of the hiring process can be valuable.
Each institution must commit to policies and action plans that
set quantifiable goals for women in different position categories.
Ideally, the number of women reaching the interview stages
should match the gender ratio of a given academic field. Concrete
recruitment strategies to achieve these goals could be developed,
for example, by adopting mandatory submission of regular reports
on gender ratio with quantifiable measures (Bergman et al., 2013).
As an example, if no women candidates apply, the University of
California, Berkeley requires the position to be re-announced
more broadly. Institutions can be required to be more explicit
and transparent about how merit is evaluated. All of the above
measures can be enforced with central incentives, such as funding allocations, to motivate departments to implement the necessary steps and hire more women (Bergman et al., 2013). Another
solution to help reach a larger and more diverse pool of potential
candidates would be the development of a curated and regularly
updated list of underrepresented minority mentees that could
become targets for job searches and awards (as it is already the
case for conference speakers; Table 1).
Importantly, we believe that hiring committees need to recognize forms of scientific contribution to the STEM community not
directly tied to scientific productivity. Such contributions include
outreach, knowledge dissemination, and faculty service; these
are contributions that women make on average significantly
more than men, taking time from more traditional forms of
research (Guarino and Borden, 2017). The practice of science
is evolving, and additional qualification criteria for hiring decisions should be adopted to acknowledge the broader range of
roles and responsibilities of contemporary scientists (Moher
et al., 2018). In addition to building toward gender equity, recognizing and incentivizing these contributions to our academic
communities will benefit all scientists, regardless of gender.
Suggestions at the societal level
When legally possible (as in Sweden, Germany, and Switzerland),
any organization, including academic institutions, can set policies
on gender equity, set goals for gender ratios in different position
categories, and develop recruitment strategies to achieve these
goals (Nielsen et al., 2017; Schrouff et al., 2019; Exploring
quotas in academia; Des quotas pour promouvoir l’égalité des
chances dans la recherche).
Gender bias in negotiation outcomes
Negotiations are important for building a successful career, as
they can lead to better starting salaries and start-up packages;
salary increases; better work conditions; and increased allocation of personnel, lab space, and other resources. On average,
men tend to initiate negotiations more often than women (Babcock et al., 2006; Small et al., 2007). Additionally, when they

Neuron 109, July 7, 2021 2061

ll
Perspective
do, women still get less out of negotiations, are less likely than
men to be successful in receiving the raise they asked for, and
may incur a social cost for standing up for themselves (Bowles
et al., 2007; Mazei et al., 2015).
Importantly, negotiations might be affected by perceived
gender stereotypes, as gender roles influence both parties of
the negotiations regardless of their gender (Kray et al., 2001,
2014). In accordance with Role Congruity Theory (Eagly and
Karau, 2002), women are often reluctant to negotiate, because
initiating negotiations is perceived as stereotypically male
behavior. Moreover, expressions of emotions commonly associated with leadership characteristics, such as anger and pride
(Brescoll, 2016), are more widely tolerated and even appreciated
when they emanate from men compared to women (Brescoll and
Uhlmann, 2008). The expression of gender roles is a complex
phenomenon though. On the one hand, women may lose social
capital (i.e., the work connections that have productive benefits)
when voicing their opinions, especially when they go against the
group’s opinion. On the other hand, it has been reported that
women who described themselves as displaying so-called
masculine personality traits (i.e., a competitive mindset and willingness to take risks) had a 4.3% greater chance of getting positions and were more likely to take up positions that offered
10% higher wages than those displaying so-called feminine personality traits (i.e., gentle, friendly, and affectionate) (Drydakis
et al., 2018). This deep-seated implicit bias, held by all genders,
has non-trivial consequences for women’s careers in academia.
Suggestions at the institutional level
Transparency is a key element for equity during negotiations. We
propose that institutions provide access to everyone’s salary
and a range of possible salaries per academic level. Gender differences in economic outcomes tend to be smaller when negotiators first receive information about the bargaining range in a
negotiation (Mazei et al., 2015). Such an approach could be
complemented by providing information to faculty about ranges
of research budgets or salaries and construct a rational (rather
than ad hoc) process for determining how resources are
allocated.
Removing stereotypes in both parties of the negotiations can
improve women’s performance (Kray and Kennedy, 2017). It
has been shown that having supportive academic supervisors
plays an important role in improving negotiation effectiveness
for women (Fiset and Saffie-Robertson, 2020). Also, for mentees
eager to develop their negotiation skills, institutions could offer
courses on this topic. For instance, several online services, highlighted on Table 1, offer training materials on negotiation strategies, as well as materials targeted for companies wanting to
improve their gender representation. These workshops provide
techniques for negotiation and conflict resolution.
Gender inequalities are present in conferences
Conferences and meetings are crucial avenues for scientists to
communicate new discoveries, form research collaborations,
communicate with funding agencies, and attract new members
to their labs and programs (Calisi and a Working Group of
Mothers in Science, 2018). For instance, invitations to seminars
at different institutions increase scientists’ visibility and expand
their academic networks. However, equally qualified women

2062 Neuron 109, July 7, 2021

scientists are often given fewer opportunities to speak at conferences and seminars than men. For instance, nearly half of
the conferences in neuroscience have fewer women speakers
than the base rate of women working in the field of the conference (Conference Watch at a glance | biaswatchneuro, (Langin,
2019). Given that conference presentations are an important indicator of the impact and significance of one’s research, this
form of gender bias has negative implications for women during
hiring and promotion. Inviting women speakers and providing
them with resources that allow them to attend the conference
contributes to their professional development and increases
their visibility. This action also contributes to the perception
of women researchers as leaders for young scientists in the
audience. This visibility is especially important for boosting
the confidence of young women researchers. Moreover,
women in the conference audience generally remain less
visible, as they ask fewer questions than men. This is due to
both internal (e.g., being unsure whether their question is
appropriate) and structural factors (e.g., when the first question
is asked by a man, women are less likely to follow up) (Carter
et al., 2018).
Another important point that undermines the experience of
women at conferences is unprofessional and inappropriate
behavior (Parsons, 2015) (see Sexual harassment is a major
obstacle encompassing all career stages). This may cause
some scientists to avoid conferences due to feeling unsafe (Richey et al., 2015). Specifically, sexual and gender harassment
and micro-aggressions primarily target women and are a common form of reported harassment at conferences (Marts,
2017). Finally, disrespectful and unprofessional questions and
feedback during poster sessions and talks may discourage
women from presenting their work (Biggs et al., 2018).
Suggestions at the individual level
We recommend that invited participants take proactive actions
to promote gender equity. They could ask the organizers what
measures are taken to ensure that the symposium and/or conference will not be a man-dominated event and could also decline
to speak at conferences with an imbalanced speaker lineup. For
instance, attendees can monitor progress in a conference’s history of gender balance in speaker selection and see the base
rates of women in relevant subfields, as is already possible in
neuroscience (Table 1). We believe that scientists of all genders
and levels of seniority should take personal responsibility to
ensure professional conduct by speaking out against harassment and other biased behaviors.
Suggestions at the institutional level
Conferences can strive to ensure that symposia include genderbalanced speakers and chairs, at least in a ratio that matches the
demographics of the field. Conference, seminar, and symposium
organizers should have a list of women speakers that they can
invite. They can search outside their personal and professional
networks by consulting resources such as the directory
compiled by Jennifer Glass and Minda Monteagudo, which lists
searchable databases of highly qualified women by subfield (Table 1). As a notable example, proposals for symposia at the
Federation of European Neuroscience Societies (FENS) Forum
are required to include men and women speakers or provide a
justification for single-gender symposia.

ll
Perspective
We also propose that organizers consider existing tools to
mitigate their own bias. Gender balance at neuroscience conferences has been publicly monitored through the website
BiasWatchNeuro (Table 1). Such measures could be implemented in many academic fields. In the context of conferences,
unlike that for citations, diversity must come from the top; the organizations hosting a conference should strive for a committee
that is well trained regarding bias. The Organization for Human
Brain Mapping (OHBM) has introduced an ‘‘affirmative attention’’
approach by which new council members are elected through a
ballot, so that the candidates for at least some open positions
may only include women, to ensure that the gender distribution
in the council remains equitable, no matter which candidates
get elected (Tzovara et al., 2021). Conference organizers can
also offer programs that raise awareness of the issue of gender
bias. For example, the annual meetings of several major conferences, such as the Society for Neuroscience, OHBM, or FENS,
include educational courses, workshops, and informational sessions on gender bias (Seeds of Change within OHBM: Three
Years of Work Addressing Inclusivity and Diversity). Another
example is the ‘‘power hour’’ institutionalized by the Gordon
Research Conferences, which consists of a forum for conversations about diversity, inclusivity, and related topics.
However, in workshops about gender bias, often only highly
successful women are represented on panels discussing bias
and women’s careers in academia. In these instances, we
believe that it is important to avoid promoting survivorship
bias, which emphasizes positive outcomes without addressing
the barriers and challenges that must be overcome to achieve
that success more broadly among women scientists. Moreover,
men are not usually invited as speakers in these events and are
also usually absent from the audience, which renders them less
aware of the issues around gender bias and therefore less effective allies. We suggest that the way that the speakers and topics
of panels are chosen must be improved to be more inclusive and
represent the full spectrum of diversity in the community.
An inclusive code of conduct has been proposed as mandatory for each conference, stating what is and what is not appropriate behavior for conference attendees (Favaro et al., 2016).
Conference organizers should have clear plans of action in place
in case harassment occurs, including anonymous reporting and
removing confirmed harassers from the conference (Marts,
2017; Parsons, 2015). The suggested code of conduct should
also include respectful ways to provide constructive scientific
feedback (Favaro et al., 2016), a practice that should be
implemented across all contexts within academia. Lastly, all attendees should feel concerned about and responsible for maintaining a respectable environment during conferences. Since it
can sometimes be hard to intervene as things unfold in real
time, we suggest that conference organizers provide a specific
contact where members can report unethical or inappropriate incidents.
Sexual harassment is a major obstacle encompassing all
career stages
A recent exhaustive report on sexual assault led by the National
Academies of Science, Engineering, and Medicine, and funded
by the NIH, reported that rates of sexual harassment are as

high as 58% for academic faculty and staff and between 20%
and 50% for students. The majority of the sexual harassment
experienced by women in academia consists of sexist hostility.
These unacceptable rates are higher than any other work environment except for the military (National Academies of Sciences,
Engineering, and Medicine, 2018). The consequences of harassment are far reaching and require widespread efforts to reduce
these high rates if we are to see gender parity in a scientific
workplace.
Sexual harassment falls into four main categories: microaggression (i.e., comments or actions that express prejudiced attitudes), sexual coercion, unwanted sexual attention, and gender
harassment (National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and
Medicine, 2018) for a detailed review). Harassment consists of
actions that create a hostile and inequitable environment for
members of a specific group. Harassment is not limited to the
extreme form of physical assault; it also includes endorsing beliefs that someone’s intelligence is inferior to another’s or making
demeaning jokes that target one gender group.
Unfortunately, all types of sexual harassment are common and
lead to negative outcomes for the people who experience them.
In addition to the 58% of academic faculty or staff who experienced sexual harassment, 38% of women trainees and 23% of
men trainees experienced sexual harassment from faculty (National Academies of Sciences, 2018). More egregious numbers
are found in specific fields; a recent study reports that 75% of undergraduate women majoring in physics experienced sexual
harassment (Aycock et al., 2019). While peer-to-peer harassment is also prevalent, trainees experience worse professional
outcomes when faculty at their university conducted the harassment. These numbers may underestimate the problem, as
trainees might not feel comfortable speaking up when their
career development, and sometimes even legal status in a country, depends on the person harassing them. In another study of
474 scientists, 30% of women reported feeling unsafe at work,
compared to 2% of men (Clancy et al., 2017). The rates were
even higher for women of color, where almost 50% of women
scientists of color reported feeling unsafe at work (Clancy
et al., 2017). These experiences are chronically stressful and
have been linked to higher levels of depression, anxiety, and
generally impaired psychological well-being (Lim and Cortina,
2005; Parker and Griffin, 2002). People who have experienced
sexual harassment report higher rates of absenteeism, tardiness, and use of sick leave (measured on scales where respondents indicated desirability, frequency, likelihood, and ease of
engaging in these behaviors) and unfavorable job behaviors
(e.g., making excuses to get out of work, neglecting tasks not
evaluated on performance appraisal) (Schneider et al., 1997).
Finally, and not surprisingly, individuals who experience sexual
harassment are more likely to leave their jobs. All of these statistics demonstrate that sexual harassment is both alarmingly common and reduces the scientific productivity and well-being of the
people who have been harmed. Yet, when this behavior is reported, the whistle-blowers may be either retaliated against or
there may be no repercussions for the perpetrators. Moreover,
even the policies that aim to protect victims of harassment
have substantial negative consequences, which are more likely
to occur to women than men. These include reluctance to have

Neuron 109, July 7, 2021 2063

ll
Perspective
one-to-one meetings with women or include them in social
events or reluctance to hire women for positions that require
close contact with them (Atwater et al., 2019).
Suggestions at the individual level
Collegial behavior that does not propagate harassment and micro-aggressions should be the bare minimum expectation in any
lab or academic institution. Individuals of all levels should
consider their personal responsibility to promote a respectful
and professional environment and avoid and denounce unwelcome behavior when witnessed. Besides everyone’s own responsibility, it is essential that organizational leaders display an
unequivocal anti-harassment message (Buchanan et al., 2014).
Suggestions at the institutional level
Sexual harassment cannot be tolerated and must be severely
reprehended by institutions. Although some initiatives for
combating harassment exist, there is to date no evidence that
current policies have succeeded in reducing harassment (ACD
Working Group on Changing the Culture to End Sexual
Harassment). To counter this ineffectiveness, the NIH has
recently recommended that sexual harassment needs to be
equated to scientific misconduct, including similar mechanisms
for reporting, investigation, and adjudication. A recent report
form the NIH has revealed that since 2018, 75 PIs have been
removed from their grants after sexual harassment or discrimination complaints (Update on the ACD Working Group
Recommendations on Changing the Culture to End Sexual
Harassment).
Researchers found guilty of sexual harassment could be
barred from applying for new grants over a period of years
deemed appropriate by the various regulatory entities similar
to the penalty for scientific misconduct. Examples of such entities in the US would be the Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS), their Office of Research Integrity (ORI), and the
NIH. Importantly, the committees involved in investigating and
adjudicating harassment should be independent of the institution leaders (Greider et al., 2019).
One solution often proposed to combat sexual harassment is
anti-harassment training. This consists of requiring students and
staff to participate in workshops detailing sexual harassment
policies and what constitutes unwelcome behavior. This
approach has been widely suggested and is currently implemented in several institutions despite its debatable effectiveness
in reducing harassment. Indeed, it has been shown that some
approaches could have the opposite effect, with men being
less likely to judge a situation as harassment after receiving
training, leading to gender stereotype reinforcement (Roehling
and Huang, 2018). Moreover, empirical studies have shown
that training employees to recognize what constitutes harassment can be followed by decreases in women managers (Dobbin
and Kalev, 2019). By contrast, training managers to recognize
signs of harassment and intervene results in increases in women
managers (Dobbin and Kalev, 2019). This seeming discrepancy
may be due to gender differences in perception of harassment
so that women are more likely to believe victims of harassment.
Departments need to carefully design their sexual harassment
training, as studies have reported that the designs of such
training are essential and need to be adapted to the targeted
populations (Dobbin and Kalev, 2019). Interventions that place

2064 Neuron 109, July 7, 2021

trainees as allies, such as bystander intervention training,
showed positive effects on sexual harassment prevention in
academia and military sectors (Buchanan et al., 2014; Cares
et al., 2015; Katz and Moore, 2013; Potter and Moynihan,
2011). For instance, Potter et al. (2019) are developing videogames to educate college students bystander intervention skills
in situations of sexual harassment and stalking.
One example of a novel yet untested approach is the ‘‘Respect
is Part of Research’’ initiative by graduate students in the University of California, Berkeley Physics Department. During these
trainings, participants discuss case studies in small groups
together with a facilitator, addressing what is wrong about the
behavior of the actors in the example, separating intent from
impact, and methods to resolve the situation. Providing trainees
with the tools to handle difficult situations and creating a supportive community has the potential to significantly shift the culture toward more respectful behavior in academia. However, its
effectiveness for combating harassment in the long-term still remains to be tested.
Another factor that can assist in reducing harassment is
adopting clear anti-harassment policies in codes of conduct
(Why and How to Develop an Event Code of Conduct), both at
conferences and in individual labs. Enforcing a code of conduct
is a challenging task, and future efforts should focus on drafting
clear policies for different scenarios.
Suggestions at the societal level
To lower the rates of sexual harassment, all members of the scientific community, and the community at large, need to make
widespread changes. Learning to recognize sexual harassment
should be an ongoing goal for any nation, starting with education
in schools. We recommend that all organizations develop programs charged with reducing the prevalence of sexual violence,
sexual harassment, and stalking through prevention, advocacy,
training, and healing (for example, see the Path to Care center
from University of California, Berkeley). This approach is distinct
from and complementary to the purpose of official university
legal procedures (e.g., Title IX in the US); while such officers legally arbitrate gender discrimination disputes, the university program we envision would be dedicated to serving the survivors of
sexual harassment, preventing new cases, and training the university-wide community.
Encompassing all sectors: Family planning in academia
Gender inequity exists in the division of household labor. Women
typically shoulder most of the burden in childcare and maintenance
of the household, even among dual-career partners (Chopra and
Zambelli, 2017). Women have increasingly joined the paid labor
force, increasing their total work time, but men have not increased
the amount of time they spend in unpaid household work. The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic is the most recent
evidence of the impact of gender inequality in the labor market
(Alon et al., 2020). During the lockdown, women scientists submitted fewer manuscripts and started fewer research projects than
men (Viglione, 2020), consistent with an additional and disproportionate burden of childcare. While the majority of studies consider
households composed of one man and one woman, further work is
needed to evaluate the relations between gender and labor in single-parent homes or same-gender parent homes.

ll
Perspective
Although academia has its perks for the single-parent, samegender-parent, and different-gender-parent families, such as
flexible hours and additional time to tenure, other working conditions can become barriers for family planning. Career stages
where funding and mobility are critical, such as transitions between graduate school, postgraduate training, and tenure positions, often correspond to a time when researchers may wish to
start a family (see Figure 1). However, pregnancy, childbirth,
nursing, parental leave, and early childcare take a considerable
amount of time, physical and mental resources, and money
that constitute a competitive disadvantage in a scientific career.
Indeed, parental leave negatively impacts metrics of productivity
of early career scientists who are parents (Chapman et al., 2019),
yet with a stronger effect for women (Morgan et al., 2021), which
in turn impacts the possibility to obtain grant funding (i.e., several
calls are limited to a certain amount of years post-degree according to funding agency policies).
Women with children are reluctant to attend conferences due
to the lack of childcare support (Calisi and a Working Group of
Mothers in Science, 2018). Conferences in distant locations
add another layer of complexity, as transoceanic flights often
mean a longer stay away from home. Adequate facilities, such
as lactation rooms or support for a traveling caretaker to assist
in the care of their infant as the scientist attends the meeting
are rarely provided. This limited mobility reduces parents’ opportunities for international collaborations and funding, which are
common criteria used for promotion and evaluations.
Importantly, women face even stronger discrimination when
they are part of nontraditional family formations; single mothers
experience stronger work-family strain than partnered ones
(Baxter and Alexander, 2008). Studies of single-mother doctoral
students have shown that they fear being judged in their departments and that they often feel excluded by university life and academic schedules (AmiriRad, 2016). Although LGBTQ+
(Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Queer, Plus other gender
identities and sexual orientations) parents face similar challenges as cisgender and heterosexual parents (King et al.,
2013), LGBTQ+ individuals might have fewer health or retirement
benefits and face unequal treatment in academia (Cech and
Waidzunas, 2021; Thompson and Parry, 2017). Future studies
should address the particular challenges and biases faced by
single-parent and LGBTQ+ families and their potential impact
on academic achievements.
Apart from the academic aspect, most societies are not built to
assist families where both parents pursue a demanding career
path. For instance, public schools in some countries like Germany often stop in the early afternoon, and it can be hard to
find public preschool or after-school childcare. Moreover, working mothers often feel stigmatized, as they risk being looked
down upon by citizens of more ‘‘traditional’’ societies for their
choices to work instead of staying at home with their children.
Suggestions at the individual level
Parents should not have to choose between having a family and
an academic career. Evaluation of academic progress should
take into consideration delays caused by parenthood and childcare responsibilities. Individuals should also assess their own
possible tendencies to judge or exclude academics with young
children and become prepared to support initiatives that would

encourage their participation in gatherings, conferences, and
other professional activities.
Suggestions at the institutional level
Institutions need to adopt official extensions of graduate, postdoctoral, and tenure timelines due to childbirth and parenthood.
To address the financial difficulties for academic families, we
suggest a number of measures. First, job security can be
improved by creating longer-term contracts where possible
and providing bridge funds at the department or university level
to support trainees during gaps in funding (Stewart and Valian,
2018). Both universities and funding institutions should put measures in place to prevent a gap in funding during parental leave
(Powell 2019). Special provisions for parenthood can be made
in calls for proposals and funding mechanisms. A few funding organizations include childbirth in their policies as a valid reason to
extend the eligibility window (from 1 year for NIH K awards to
18 months for ERC grants or a 2-year extension to post-PhD
limits per child for the Emmy Noether Program of the German
Research Foundation) or subtract time for parental leave
(‘‘Research Project for Young Talent’’ proposed by the Research
Council of Norway, 2–7 years post-PhD). Finally, efforts should
be made to reduce the difficulty in returning to work after maternity leave, such as providing lactation rooms.
Solutions can be found to support couples in which both partners are in academia (Schiebinger et al., 2008). By enabling
couple hiring for tenure-track positions, institutions can help
women pursue their academic career. Critically, universities
should ensure access to affordable, on-site childcare, as this
both improves outcomes for children enrolled in such programs
and increases women’s participation in the workforce (Morrissey, 2017; Eckerson et al., 2016).
Specific funding should be allocated for parents to travel for
conferences and sabbaticals. Conferences, universities, and
funding agencies can reserve a part of their budget to create
travel funds for parents. Compared to a decade ago, more conferences are offering nursing rooms (Cardel et al., 2020; Hope
et al., 2019; Langin, 2018) and other types of on-site childcare,
which should be accessible to all parents (Cardel et al., 2020;
Langin, 2018). However, unfamiliar caregivers are not always a
viable option, and parents will likely feel most comfortable
knowing their child is cared for by a primary caregiver. To
address these issues, some conferences, such as FENS or
OHBM, are offering childcare grants, which can either cover
travel expense for a trusted caregiver (spouse, partner, or nanny)
to accompany the parent and child,or pay for expenses involved
in leaving the child at home (Calisi and a Working Group of
Mothers in Science, 2018; Langin, 2018; Tzovara et al., 2021).
Suggestions at the societal level
These issues require a broad reshaping of society, which still relies on parental roles or family patterns that are increasingly obsolete. Law in all countries needs to enforce official extension of
timelines to accommodate pregnancy, childbirth, and parenthood, as increases in parental leave result in fewer women leaving the workforce (Jones and Wilcher, 2019). For instance, the
total paid period of parental leave in Norway is between 46 and
59 weeks, with maternal and paternal quotas of 15 weeks each
and a joint period of 16 weeks. The downside of providing
parental leave to both parents is that previous research has

Neuron 109, July 7, 2021 2065

ll
Perspective
shown that giving the same extensions to both parents puts
mothers at a disadvantage, as fathers are more likely to increase
their productivity during this period (Antecol et al., 2016). It is
therefore important for parents to have an equal split of child-caring duties and profit from allocated time to bond with their child.
Not all gender biases are the same: Intersectionality
Discussions surrounding plans to combat gender bias in
academia are incomplete without attention to the unique struggles
of women who hold additional identities are subject to discrimination. Barriers faced by all women in academia are compounded for
those who are members of additional underrepresented groups
(e.g., based on, but not limited to, race, ethnicity, first-generation
status, religion, socioeconomic status, gender expression,
gender identity, sexual orientation, and disability) that interact
with and increase gender bias (Armstrong and Jovanovic, 2015).
For instance, the gender wage gap has been shown to be wider
for transgender women (Schilt and Wiswall, 2008) and black
women (Guillory, 2001). Women of color faculty are the least likely
to receive tenure of all demographic groups despite comparable
productivity (Armstrong and Jovanovic, 2017). As such, successful interventions must consider these supra-additive effects and
take an intersectional approach.
Suggestions at the institutional level
Across all career stages and aspects of academia, institutions
could develop interventions and programs that take into account
the specific needs of overlapping identities. For instance, Flores
(2011) proposed that financial awards or targeted mentoring programs could help underrepresented women to overcome practical and psychological burdens associated with intersecting
identities. Policies to increase the Latino community in STEM propose mentoring and educational programs in different languages
for women whose native language is not English (Flores, 2011). A
first step in developing such programming can be interviews and
focus groups with underrepresented minority women in order to
receive feedback on structural inequalities that can be addressed
at the institutional level. Intersectional approaches can include targeted networking events, mentorship pipelines, and funding initiatives, as well as rigorous data collection to assess efficacy of these
approaches. As with any intervention, special care needs to be
taken to not overburden the individuals experiencing discrimination with additional tasks and administrative overload.
Discussion
In this article, we review empirical evidence demonstrating
pervasive gender bias throughout all stages and venues of academic life. Studies have shown that women are less likely to be
hired or to receive tenure than men, despite equal performance.
They receive less grant funding and fewer prestigious awards.
The rates of accepted publications, presentations, and patents
are lower for women, and women are less likely to be first or
last author on publications or submit to high impact journals.
Studies are documenting a prevailing notion that the work of
men has higher merit than that of women, a perception that is reflected in the discrepant number of citations of men versus
women authors in research papers or assigned classroom readings. Positions on review panels with the power to hire, promote,
approve funding, or decide policy are still largely offered to men,

2066 Neuron 109, July 7, 2021

whose own biases (unconscious or otherwise) may impede the
advancement of women academics. Women’s salaries are lower
than men’s, and women take on the greater burden of childcare,
restricting their opportunities to conduct research or attend conferences. Finally, women continue to experience sexual harassment and hostility at an alarming rate, not only in their work environment but also at conferences and other academic venues.
Apart from the ethical issues this evidence raises, a large proportion of the highly trained and talented individuals who are
essential for advancing research and educational practice are
not progressing in their academic careers, largely due to the
rectifiable issue of gender bias. Here, we gather, explore, and
suggest actions at the individual, institutional, and societal levels
aimed to mitigate the effects of gender bias. Implementing some
of the proposed recommendations will not be trivial, as new regulations and controls might themselves require monitoring for
bias. We cannot predict the outcomes of the proposed suggestions. However, openly and explicitly acknowledging gender
bias (that all genders are susceptible to) is an essential starting
point to restore the unbalanced academic environment. In
considering such complexities, institutions should engage the
advice and guidance of social science experts and the affected
groups to ensure optimal solutions.
Diversity is essential to delivering excellence in science, as it
increases cognitive diversity, which in turn leads to novel solutions (Page, 2008) and innovations (Hofstra et al., 2020), as
well as increased problem-solving (Hong and Page, 2004) and
scientific discovery (Nielsen et al., 2018). Besides the invaluable
contribution to science, it will also help reduce stereotypes
(Miller et al., 2015). To ensure successful changes, mindsets
must change, and our proposed solutions provide a step in
that direction. However, many challenges first need to be understood and overcome. Thus, a few important aspects of gender
bias must be addressed.
The fight for gender equity needs diverse role models
and strong allies
First, we need to amplify the voices of underrepresented scientists and mentors as role models in order to encourage diversity.
One of the main reasons for leaving science is a lack of mentoring, which affects more women than men trainees, as women are
less likely to be mentored (Preston, 2004). In line with this reported gender bias in mentoring in academia, experimental evidence showed that women and men science faculty were less
likely to offer mentoring to a trainee when their application materials were assigned a female rather than a male name (Moss-Racusin et al., 2012). In order to overcome this bias against women
trainees, mentors have to make an intentional effort to offer mentoring to women trainees to ensure that mentoring is provided
equally to women and men trainees. This study also found that
female applicants were rated as less competent than the male
applicants with an identical application. Awareness of implicit
bias is an important first step to overcome these barriers and
enable mentors to improve equal support of women mentees.
For instance, they could actively encourage them to submit to
higher impact factor journals, apply for funding opportunities
and large grants, nominate them to awards, invite them to speak
in conferences and seminars, and meet potential collaborators.
All scientists should consider gender equity when building a

ll
Perspective
team of principal investigators for collaborative work, particularly
on larger or more prestigious projects. Having encouraging mentors and role models with whom students and scientists can
identify will positively shift their perception of themselves (Morgenroth et al., 2015) and mitigate imposter syndrome (Abdelaal,
2020). This type of support can make the academic career path
more inclusive and accessible, irrespective of race, ethnicity,
sex, sexual orientation, or gender.
Second, everyone needs to be on board, irrespective of
gender or career stage. This is particularly critical, as men still
hold most positions of power in STEM and can use their positions to change the system from within. This can be challenging,
as there are several persistent misbeliefs about preventing progress (Johnson and Smith, 2018). One might argue that giving
more opportunities to women necessarily comes with a loss of
privileges for men. However, the situation in some STEM domains is not a zero-sum game. Many countries suffer from an
overall STEM worker shortage; thus, adding women to the workforce would improve overall industry performance. In addition,
gender equity comes with many benefits; organizations with
more female leaders offer employees more generous policies
(Ingram and Simons, 1995), producing better business results
(Berdahl, 2007). Some men might feel that gender equity ‘‘is
not their fight.’’ The answer to this concern is two-fold. First,
gender equity is a moral imperative, and the voices and actions
of all are needed. Second, gender equity is a man’s fight.
Gendered roles impact not only women but also men; many still
believe that ‘‘child caregiving/domestic work is not a male job’’
and that ‘‘a man needs to be the family breadwinner,’’ beliefs
that can have a strong impact on mental health (King et al.,
2020). This position reflects a ‘‘fixed mindset’’ about gender
roles, which leads men to rationalize the status quo, i.e., engage
in system justification about gender inequality (Kray et al., 2017).
A more fundamental antidote in combating gender bias is to promote growth mindsets (e.g., ‘‘things can change, there is no
reason why men and women can’t occupy the same social
roles’’; Dweck, 2016).
Notably, the concern and interest around the topic of women’s
underrepresentation in STEM has not been matched by a similar
concern about men’s underrepresentation in healthcare, early
education, and domestic roles (Block et al., 2019; Croft et al.,
2015; Meeussen et al., 2020). However, gender experts are
now pointing at men and men’s representation as a key component to advance women’s place in society (Block et al., 2019;
Croft et al., 2021). Gender equity will benefit men by freeing
them from societal biases. In turn, a change in the aspirations
and careers of men will likely benefit overall gender equality;
men who take on nontraditional roles can enable women and
girls to envision themselves in less traditional, complementary
roles (Block et al., 2018; Croft et al., 2014). When more men
turn to roles in health care, education, and domestic work, there
will be more STEM roles that can be occupied by women. To
quote one of our reviewers, ‘‘As long as there is stagnation in
men’s roles, there will be an upper limit on the amount of change
that can be achieved for women’s roles as well.’’
Importantly, as soon as the fight for gender equity becomes a
universal cause, the overload of academic work weighing on
women should be alleviated. The approach of several institutes

or funding agencies for improving equity is to task women with
taking part in administrative obligations during hiring processes,
panels in conferences, etc. However, being fewer in number, the
same women find themselves having to manage substantial extra work. Besides these administrative burdens, they are also
often asked to participate in initiatives aimed at promoting diversity. This work additionally affects women disproportionately
and even more so women of color (Nair, 2014). It may seem
natural that individuals facing discrimination would have the
strongest interest and possibly knowledge on how to resolve it.
However, leaving the work that promotes diversity to those
directly affected by the lack of diversity/inclusivity can contribute
to further injustices. This work thus needs to be shared with advocates from the non-minority category.
When implementing some of the proposed solutions, it is
important to consider complexities that might emerge from
‘‘positive discrimination,’’ where the ‘‘best’’ candidate might be
overlooked in favor of a candidate who meets another requirement (e.g., ethnicity, first-generation status, religion, socioeconomic status, gender expression, gender identity, sexual orientation, and disability; STEM Women, 2019). Not dismantling
structural conditions of inequality means that existing disadvantages triumph. Institutions should carefully consider these complexities and include affected minorities in policy development to
ensure optimal solutions.
Challenges and major open questions in addressing
gender bias
Improving gender equity in science represents challenges at
several levels. First of all, despite an abundance of research,
there is a lack of systematic and validated metrics to assess
gender bias and evaluate the efficacy of various initiatives in
improving gender equity. Without standardized data collection
and metrics to objectively measure gender bias, it is often impossible to draw solid conclusions on the degree of its presence and/
or origin. However, for appropriate measures to be deployed, the
source of bias needs to be properly established so that proposed
actions can differentially target the real cause. One reason for this
is that despite its far-fetched consequences, evaluating the existence of bias can be very subtle and challenging. Measuring presence and then reductions in implicit bias in a controlled setting
does not necessarily translate to changes in real-life situations
(Forscher et al., 2019). It is crucial that advocacy goals do not
bias the presentation of scientific evidence for and against
different interventions and policy changes (Eagly, 2016, 2018).
Moreover, there is a lack of systematic gathering and reporting
of gender data from various organizations such as universities,
conferences, funding agencies, or award and hiring committees.
Moving forward, we encourage institutions to gather and report
data about gender representation in their membership and
collaborate with social scientists who can provide valuable
expertise. Importantly, we encourage all scientific bodies to increase transparency about the successes and failures of interventions that they have used in the past to address bias.
Notably, for many of the issues raised in this article, no
straightforward solutions exist. Despite an increasing number
of actions taken to mitigate gender bias in the workplace over
the past decades, a thorough assessment and evaluation of
their impact on diversity are often lacking, as their short- and

Neuron 109, July 7, 2021 2067

ll
Perspective
long-term impacts are hard to quantify in the real world (Paluck
and Green, 2009; Paluck et al., 2021). Long-term impacts are vital to quantify, especially as some evidence suggests that
gender bias persists even after gender representation becomes
balanced, paradoxically perpetuated by members who believe
that gender bias has been overcome (Begeny et al., 2020). Not
all of the potential solutions presented here are destined to
work, but several of them are certainly worth consideration
(see Table 2 for an overview of tested versus proposed actions).
For instance, diversity training is oftentimes recommended as
one potential tool to mitigate gender bias. The admirable goal is
to raise awareness on implicit and explicit biases that every human being carries. Although it is an intuitive way to tackle bias,
the efficiency of diversity training is currently debated. Some
studies, especially in the corporate sector, have reported
modest to no effect of trainings with potential adverse effects
for certain minority groups (Dobbin and Kalev, 2013; Dobbin
et al., 2011; Kalev et al., 2006), while other studies have shown
encouraging results in both corporate sectors (Anand and Winters, 2008) and academia (Carnes et al., 2015). Multiple factors
influence the effectiveness of diversity training (Roberson et al.,
2013). Among them, the design of the training itself (e.g., format,
length, and, most importantly, the way men are depicted [as
allies and not oppressors]) and the way to assign training (i.e.,
voluntarily or in person) may positively influence the outcome
of these initiatives (Bezrukova et al., 2016; Kalev and Dobbin,
2020). Genuine motivation, support, and commitment from superiors; social accountability; and transparency play important
roles (Chang et al., 2019; Dobbin and Kalev, 2020). Lastly, as diversity training is not effective to change behavior in isolation
(Kalev et al., 2006), other actions and concrete changes at the
institutional and societal levels are needed (Dobbin and Kalev,
2020; Paluck et al., 2021).
Combining several actions is required for successful outcomes. For instance, increasing the representation of women
across scientific bodies (i.e., hiring committees, review panels,
in mentorship) and career stages can be helpful in reducing
bias, but on its own, it is not enough. Extensive research in
hundreds of thousands of participants and across multiple
countries has shown that increasing the enrollment of women
students in higher education can reduce gender stereotypes.
However, increasing the employment of women as researchers
reduces explicit, but not implicit, stereotypes (Miller et al.,
2015). The perseverance of explicit gender stereotypes is
stronger in disciplines that are male dominated, but implicit stereotypes remain, even in disciplines where women are well represented (Smyth and Nosek, 2015). Gender stereotypes are
also prevalent in women, who can be biased against women.
It is important to highlight that increasing the representation
of women is a necessary, but not sufficient, condition for addressing gender bias.
A second major challenge in improving gender equity is that
not all scientific fields have the same gender imbalances across
career stages. Several fields like psychology typically achieve a
more balanced gender ratio than other men-dominated fields
such as engineering. Future attempts should implement initiatives that cater to the needs of each subfield and also test the
generalizability of initiatives across fields.

2068 Neuron 109, July 7, 2021

Last, one major open question is that of governance. To date,
there is a lack of governance models for monitoring gender bias
and deciding whether a given solution is sufficient or well implemented. Importantly, the decision about whether a solution is
successful often relies on arbitrary metrics and does not take
into account the experiences of women who are targets of
bias. We invite scholars to develop better governance models
and oversight committees for monitoring gender bias in an inclusive and objective way.
Conclusions
Gender bias is a complex assortment of problems, encompassing all career stages. Concrete actions are required to address
each of the facets of gender bias and need to be initiated by
every academic entity, from individuals to departments to conferences and professional organizations. These actions, in combination with strong role models and a diverse pool of allies, will
make it possible to shift the culture and bring positive change.
The time for action is now.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Susan Fiske, Vinitha Rangarajan, Kristina R. Olson, and Sapna
Cheryan for their help in editing and improving the manuscript and Luisa Reis
Castro for valuable discussions. A.T. is supported by the Interfaculty Research
Cooperation ‘‘Decoding Sleep: From Neurons to Health and Mind’’ of the University of Bern and the Swiss National Science Foundation (#320030_188737
and P300PA_174451). E.A.B. is supported by NIH grant OD-010425; A.L.F.
by the Simons Collaboration for the Global Brain; and S.K. by the NIH
(RO1MH64043, RO1EY017699, and 21560-685 Silvio O. Conte Center), the
James S. McDonnell Foundation, and the Overdeck Family Foundation. C.K.
is supported by the Jacobs Foundation; N.J.K. by the NIH/NIGMS (P01GM118629) and NIH/NIMH (P50-MH109429); and J.J.L. by Brain Initiative
U19NS107609-01. A.C.N is funded by a Wellcome Trust Senior Investigator
Award (ACN 104571/Z/14/Z), a James S. McDonnell Foundation Understanding Human Cognition Collaborative Award (220020448), and the NIHR Oxford
Health Biomedical Research Centre. The Wellcome Centre for Integrative
Neuroimaging is supported by core funding from the Wellcome Trust
(203139/Z/16/Z). S.K.R. is supported by the NIH/NIDCD (1R21DC016985).
A.K.S. is supported by a research grant from the Research Council of Norway
(RCN; project number 240389) and through the RCN Centres of Excellence
scheme (project number 262762 RITMO). J.D.W. is supported by the NIMH
(R01-MH121448 and R01-MH117763); W.-J.W. by the US Office of Naval
Research (ONR; grant N00014-17-1-2041), the NIH (grant 062349), and the Simons Collaboration on the Global Brain program (grant 543057SPI). M.V.I. and
N.F.D. are supported by the NIH/NIDCD (R01-DC016345). D.S.B. is supported
by the NSF (CAREER PHY-1554488). R.T.K. is supported by the NINDS
(NS21135), NIMH (CONTE Center PO-MH109429), and Brain Initiative (U19
NS107609 and U01 NS108916).
The gender proportions in the references list of this manuscript have been
checked with cleanBib (https://github.com/dalejn/cleanBib) to evaluate
gender ratio. Our reference list contains 42.4% woman (first author)/woman
(last author), 12.2% man/woman, 22% woman/man, 18.5% man/man, and
4.88% unknown categorization. The remaining percentage is unknown. It is
important to note the limits of classifying gender identity using names, pronouns, other signifiers scraped from online databases, and that this methodology cannot account for intersex, non-binary, or transgender people.
WEB RESOURCES

ACD Working Group on Changing the Culture to End Sexual Harassment,
https://acd.od.nih.gov/working-groups/sexual-harassment.html
BiasWatchNeuro, https://biaswatchneuro.com/
cleanBib, https://github.com/dalejn/cleanBib
Conference Watch at a glance j biaswatchneuro, https://biaswatchneuro.
com/conference-watch-visual/

ll
Perspective
Des quotas pour promouvoir l’égalité des chances dans la recherche,
http://www.snf.ch/fr/pointrecherche/newsroom/Pages/news-210205des-quotas-pour-promouvoir-egalite-des-chances-dans-la-recherche.
aspx?fbclid=IwAR2XGRQ4LB1Gl3kL0iXzA-lMuP2Qe5jQQC0-nvMlF6qsJrqAWEHSopfW0c
Equality of opportunity in ERC Competitions, https://erc.europa.eu/sites/
default/files/document/file/Equality_of_opportunity_in_European_
Research_Council_Competitions_Barbara_ROMANOWICZ.pdf
EQUIP, https://www.equip.ninja/
ERC consolidator grants 2019 - statistics, 2019, https://erc.europa.eu/
sites/default/files/document/file/erc-2019-cog-statistics.pdf
Exploring quotas in academia, https://www.embo.org/documents/
science_policy/exploring_quotas.pdf
Field of degree: Women-NSF, https://www.nsf.gov/statistics/2017/
nsf17310/digest/fod-women/
GARCIA Project, http://garciaproject.eu/
Gender balance syllabus tool, https://jlsumner.shinyapps.io/syllabustool/
Gender equity guidelines for department chairs, https://www.aaup.org/
issues/women-higher-education/gender-equity-guidelines-departmentchairs
Gender Monitoring_Egalité_EPFL, https://www.epfl.ch/about/equality/fr/
egalite-epfl/gendermonitoring/
INCLUSION: directory compiled by Jennifer Glass and Minda Monteagudo, http://www.jenniferglass.com/Jennifer_Glass/Inclusion.html
NIH Data Book—Data by Gender, 2020, https://report.nih.gov/
nihdatabook/category/16
Path to Care center, https://care.berkeley.edu/
PEERE, http://www.peere.org/
RAISE Project, http://www.raiseproject.org/
Research Project for Young Talent, https://www.forskningsradet.no/en/
call-for-proposals/2020/forskerprosjekt-for-unge-talenter/
Respect is Part of Research, http://www.respectispartofresearch.com/
Seeds of Change within OHBM: Three Years of Work Addressing Inclusivity and Diversity, https://www.ohbmbrainmappingblog.com/blog/seedsof-change-within-ohbm-three-years-of-work-addressing-inclusivity-anddiversity
STEM Women, 2019, https://www.stemwomen.co.uk/blog/2019/09/
positive-action-vs-positive-discrimination-what-can-your-company-doto-lawfully-encourage-more-female-applicants
Update on the ACD Working Group Recommendations on Changing the
Culture to End Sexual Harassment, https://acd.od.nih.gov/documents/
presentations/06102021_Lauer.pdf
Why and How to Develop an Event Code of Conduct, https://www.
asaecenter.org/resources/articles/an_plus/2019/october/why-and-howto-develop-an-event-code-of-conduct
Women in Academia: Quick Take, https://www.catalyst.org/research/
women-in-academia/

REFERENCES
Abdelaal, G. (2020). Coping with imposter syndrome in academia and
research. Biochem. 42, 62–64.
Alon, T.M., Doepke, M., Olmstead-Rumsey, J., and Tertilt, M. (2020). The
Impact of COVID-19 on Gender Equality (National Bureau of Economic
Research).
AmiriRad, M.B. (2016). Experiences of Single-Mother Doctoral Students as
They Navigate Between the Educational System, Societal Expectations, and
Parenting Their Children: A Phenomenological Approach (Lulu Press).
Anand, R., and Winters, M.-F. (2008). A Retrospective View of Corporate Diversity Training From 1964 to the Present. AMLE 7, 356–372.
Antecol, H., Bedard, K., and Stearns, J. (2016). Equal but Inequitable: Who
Benefits from Gender-Neutral Tenure Clock Stopping Policies? In IZA Discussion Papers (No. 9904; IZA Discussion Papers) (Institute of Labor Economics).

Atwater, L.E., Tringale, A.M., Sturm, R.E., Taylor, S.N., and Braddy, P.W.
(2019). Looking Ahead: How What We Know About Sexual Harassment Now
Informs Us of the Future. Organ. Dyn. 48, 100677.
Aycock, L.M., Hazari, Z., Brewe, E., Clancy, K.B.H., Hodapp, T., and Goertzen,
R.M. (2019). Sexual harassment reported by undergraduate female physicists.
Phys. Rev. Phys. Educ. Res. 15, 010121.
Babcock, L., Gelfand, M., Small, D., and Stayn, H. (2006). Gender Differences
in the Propensity to Initiate Negotiations. In Social Psychology and Economics
(Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers), pp. 239–259.
Babcock, L., Recalde, M.P., Vesterlund, L., and Weingart, L. (2017). Gender
Differences in Accepting and Receiving Requests for Tasks with Low Promotability. Am. Econ. Rev. 107, 714–747.
Balafoutas, L., and Sutter, M. (2012). Affirmative action policies promote
women and do not harm efficiency in the laboratory. Science 335, 579–582.
Barroga, E. (2020). Innovative Strategies for Peer Review. J. Korean Med. Sci.
35, e138.
Baxter, J., and Alexander, M. (2008). Mothers’ work–to–family strain in single
and couple parent families: The role of job characteristics and supports.
Aust. J. Soc. Issues 43, 195–214.
Beede, D.N., Julian, T.A., Langdon, D., McKittrick, G., Khan, B., and Doms,
M.E. (2011). Women in STEM: A gender gap to innovation (Economics and Statistics Administration Issue Brief).
Begeny, C.T., Ryan, M.K., Moss-Racusin, C.A., and Ravetz, G. (2020). In some
professions, women have become well represented, yet gender bias persistsPerpetuated by those who think it is not happening. Sci. Adv. 6, eaba7814.
€ller, R., Brueggmann, D., and Groneberg, D.A. (2018).
Bendels, M.H.K., Mu
Gender disparities in high-quality research revealed by Nature Index journals.
PLoS ONE 13, e0189136.
Berdahl, J.L. (2007). The sexual harassment of uppity women. J. Appl. Psychol. 92, 425–437.
Bergman, S., and Rustad, M.L.; a Nordic reference group (2013). The Nordic
region - a step closer to gender balance in research? Joint Nordic strategies
and measures to promote gender balance among researchers in academia.
In Nordic Council of Ministers. TemaNord 2013, 544.
Bernard, C. (2018). Editorial: Gender Bias in Publishing: Double-Blind Reviewing as a Solution? eNeuro 5, 5.
Bezrukova, K., Spell, C.S., Perry, J.L., and Jehn, K.A. (2016). A meta-analytical
integration of over 40 years of research on diversity training evaluation. Psychol. Bull. 142, 1227–1274.
Biggs, J., Hawley, P.H., and Biernat, M. (2018). The Academic Conference as a
Chilly Climate for Women: Effects of Gender Representation on Experiences of
Sexism, Coping Responses, and Career Intentions. Sex Roles 78, 394–408.
Bigler, R.S., and Leaper, C. (2015). Gendered language: psychological principles, evolving practices, and inclusive policies. Policy Insights Behav. Brain
Sci. 2, 187–194.
Blair, I.V., Ma, J.E., and Lenton, A.P. (2001). Imagining stereotypes away: the
moderation of implicit stereotypes through mental imagery. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 81, 828–841.
Block, K., Croft, A., and Schmader, T. (2018). Worth Less?: Why Men (and
Women) Devalue Care-Oriented Careers. Front. Psychol. 9, 1353.
Block, K., Croft, A., De Souza, L., and Schmader, T. (2019). Do people care if
men don’t care about caring? The asymmetry in support for changing gender
roles. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 83, 112–131.
Boring, A. (2017). Gender biases in student evaluations of teaching. J. Public
Econ. 145, 27–41.

Armstrong, M.A., and Jovanovic, J. (2015). Starting at The Crossroads: Intersectional approaches to institutionally supporting underrepresented minority
women stem faculty. J. Women Minor. Sci. Eng. 21, 141–157.

Bowles, H.R., Babcock, L., and McGinn, K.L. (2005). Constraints and triggers:
situational mechanics of gender in negotiation. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 89,
951–965.

Armstrong, M.A., and Jovanovic, J. (2017). The intersectional matrix:
Rethinking institutional change for URM women in STEM. J. Divers. High.
Educ. 10, 216–231.

Bowles, H., Babcock, L., and Lai, L. (2007). Social Incentives for Gender Differences in the Propensity to Initiate Negotiations: Sometimes It Does Hurt to Ask.
Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis. Process. 103, 84–103.

Neuron 109, July 7, 2021 2069

ll
Perspective
Bravo, G., Grimaldo, F., López-Iñesta, E., Mehmani, B., and Squazzoni, F.
(2019). The effect of publishing peer review reports on referee behavior in
five scholarly journals. Nat. Commun. 10, 322.
Brescoll, V.L. (2016). Leading with their hearts? How gender stereotypes of
emotion lead to biased evaluations of female leaders. Leadersh. Q. 27,
415–428.
Brescoll, V.L., and Uhlmann, E.L. (2008). Can an Angry Woman Get Ahead?
Status Conferral, Gender, and Expression of Emotion in the Workplace. Psychol. Sci. 19, 268–275.

Cheryan, S., Ziegler, S.A., Montoya, A.K., and Jiang, L. (2017). Why are some
STEM fields more gender balanced than others? Psychol. Bull. 143, 1–35.
Chopra, D., and Zambelli, E. (2017). No Time to Rest: Women’s Lived Experiences of Balancing Paid Work and Unpaid Care Work (Institute of Development Studies).
Choudhury, S., and Aggarwal, N.K. (2020). Reporting Grantee Demographics
for Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion in Neuroscience. J. Neurosci. 40,
7780–7781.

Buchanan, N.T., Settles, I.H., Hall, A.T., and O’Connor, R.C. (2014). A review of
organizational strategies for reducing sexual harassment: Insights from the U.
s. military. J. Soc. Issues 70, 687–702.

Clancy, K.B.H., Lee, K.M.N., Rodgers, E.M., and Richey, C. (2017). Double
jeopardy in astronomy and planetary science: Women of color face greater
risks of gendered and racial harassment. J. Geophys. Res. Planets 122,
1610–1623.

Budden, A.E., Tregenza, T., Aarssen, L.W., Koricheva, J., Leimu, R., and Lortie, C.J. (2008). Double-blind review favours increased representation of female authors. Trends Ecol. Evol. 23, 4–6.

Colgan, J. (2017). Gender Bias in International Relations Graduate Education?
New Evidence from Syllabi. PS Polit. Sci. Polit. 50, 456–460.

Burns, K.E.A., Straus, S.E., Liu, K., Rizvi, L., and Guyatt, G. (2019). Gender differences in grant and personnel award funding rates at the Canadian Institutes
of Health Research based on research content area: a retrospective analysis.
PLoS Med. 16, e1002935.
Calisi, R.M.; a Working Group of Mothers in Science (2018). Opinion: How to
tackle the childcare-conference conundrum. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 115,
2845–2849.
Cameron, E.Z., White, A.M., and Gray, M.E. (2016). Solving the Productivity
and Impact Puzzle: Do Men Outperform Women, or are Metrics Biased?
Bioscience 66, 245–252.
Caplar, N., Tacchella, S., and Birrer, S. (2017). Quantitative evaluation of
gender bias in astronomical publications from citation counts. Nat. Astron.
1, 1–5.
Cardel, M.I., Dhurandhar, E., Yarar-Fisher, C., Foster, M., Hidalgo, B.,
McClure, L.A., Pagoto, S., Brown, N., Pekmezi, D., Sharafeldin, N., et al.
(2020). Turning Chutes into Ladders for Women Faculty: A Review and Roadmap for Equity in Academia. J. Womens Health (Larchmt.) 29, 721–733.
Cares, A.C., Banyard, V.L., Moynihan, M.M., Williams, L.M., Potter, S.J., and
Stapleton, J.G. (2015). Changing attitudes about being a bystander to
violence: translating an in-person sexual violence prevention program to a
new campus. Violence Against Women 21, 165–187.
Carnes, M., Devine, P.G., Baier Manwell, L., Byars-Winston, A., Fine, E., Ford,
C.E., Forscher, P., Isaac, C., Kaatz, A., Magua, W., et al. (2015). The effect of an
intervention to break the gender bias habit for faculty at one institution: a cluster randomized, controlled trial. Acad. Med. 90, 221–230.
Carter, A.J., Croft, A., Lukas, D., and Sandstrom, G.M. (2018). Women’s visibility in academic seminars: Women ask fewer questions than men. PLoS
ONE 13, e0202743.
Cech, E.A., and Waidzunas, T.J. (2021). Systemic inequalities for LGBTQ professionals in STEM. Sci. Adv. 7, 7.
Ceci, S.J., Ginther, D.K., Kahn, S., and Williams, W.M. (2014). Women in Academic Science: A Changing Landscape. Psychol. Sci. Public Interest
15, 75–141.
Chang, E.H., Milkman, K.L., Gromet, D.M., Rebele, R.W., Massey, C., Duckworth, A.L., and Grant, A.M. (2019). The mixed effects of online diversity
training. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 116, 7778–7783.
Chapman, C., Bicca-Marques, J.C., Calvignac-Spencer, S., Fan, P.-F., Fashing, P., Gogarten, J., Guo, S., Hemingway, C., Leendertz, F., Li, B., et al. (2019).
Games academics play and their consequences: How authorship, h -index
and journal impact factors are shaping the future of academia. Proc. R. Soc.
B Biol. Sci. 40, 120–135.
Charlesworth, T.E.S., and Banaji, M.R. (2019). Gender in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics: Issues, Causes, Solutions. J. Neurosci. 39,
7228–7243.
Cheryan, S., Master, A., and Meltzoff, A.N. (2015). Cultural stereotypes as
gatekeepers: increasing girls’ interest in computer science and engineering
by diversifying stereotypes. Front. Psychol. 6, 49.

2070 Neuron 109, July 7, 2021

Cox, A.R., and Montgomerie, R. (2019). The cases for and against double-blind
reviews. PeerJ 7, e6702.
Croft, A., Schmader, T., Block, K., and Baron, A.S. (2014). The second shift reflected in the second generation: do parents’ gender roles at home predict
children’s aspirations? Psychol. Sci. 25, 1418–1428.
Croft, A., Schmader, T., and Block, K. (2015). An underexamined inequality:
cultural and psychological barriers to men’s engagement with communal
roles. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Rev. 19, 343–370.
Croft, A., Atkinson, C., and May, A.M. (2021). Promoting Gender Equality by
Supporting Men’s Emotional Flexibility. Policy Insights Behav. Brain Sci.
8, 42–49.
De Paola, M., and Scoppa, V. (2015). Gender discrimination and evaluators’
gender: Evidence from Italian academia. Economica 82, 162–188.
Devine, P.G., Forscher, P.S., Cox, W.T.L., Kaatz, A., Sheridan, J., and Carnes,
M. (2017). A Gender Bias Habit-Breaking Intervention Led to Increased Hiring
of Female Faculty in STEMM Departments. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 73, 211–215.
Dobbin, F., and Kalev, A. (2013). The Origins and Effects of Corporate Diversity
Programs (Oxford Handbooks Online).
Dobbin, F., and Kalev, A. (2019). The promise and peril of sexual harassment
programs. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 116, 12255–12260.
Dobbin, F., and Kalev, A. (2020). Why Sexual Harassment Programs Backfire
And what to do about it. Harv. Bus. Rev. 98, 45–52.
Dobbin, F., Kim, S., and Kalev, A. (2011). You Can’t Always Get What You
Need: Organizational Determinants of Diversity Programs. Am. Sociol. Rev.
76, 386–411.
Drydakis, N., Sidiropoulou, K., Bozani, V., Selmanovic, S., and Patnaik, S.
(2018). Masculine vs feminine personality traits and women’s employment outcomes in Britain: A field experiment. Int. J. Manpow. 39, 621–630.
Duch, J., Zeng, X.H.T., Sales-Pardo, M., Radicchi, F., Otis, S., Woodruff, T.K.,
and Nunes Amaral, L.A. (2012). The possible role of resource requirements and
academic career-choice risk on gender differences in publication rate and
impact. PLoS ONE 7, e51332.
Dutt, K., Pfaff, D.L., Bernstein, A.F., Dillard, J.S., and Block, C.J. (2016).
Gender differences in recommendation letters for postdoctoral fellowships in
geoscience. Nat. Geosci. 9, 805–808.
Dweck, C. (2016). What Having a ‘‘Growth Mindset’’ Actually Means. Harv.
Bus. Rev. 13, 213–226.
Dworkin, J., Zurn, P., and Bassett, D.S. (2020a). (In)citing Action to Realize an
Equitable Future. Neuron 106, 890–894.
Dworkin, J.D., Linn, K.A., Teich, E.G., Zurn, P., Shinohara, R.T., and Bassett,
D.S. (2020b). The extent and drivers of gender imbalance in neuroscience
reference lists. Nat. Neurosci. 23, 918–926.
Eagly, A.H. (2016). When passionate advocates meet research on diversity,
does the honest broker stand a chance? J. Soc. Issues 72, 199–222.

ll
Perspective
Eagly, A.H. (2018). The shaping of science by ideology: How feminism inspired,
led, and constrained scientific understanding of sex and gender. J. Soc. Issues
74, 871–888.
Eagly, A.H., and Chaiken, S. (1998). Attitude structure and function. In The
Handbook of Social Psychology, Volume D, T. Gilbert, ed. (McGraw-Hill,
x), pp. 1–2.
Eagly, A.H., and Karau, S.J. (2002). Role congruity theory of prejudice toward
female leaders. Psychol. Rev. 109, 573–598.
Eckerson, E., Talbourdet, L., Reichlin, L., Sykes, M., Noll, E., and Gault, B.
(2016). Child Care for Parents in College: A State-by-State Assessment (Institute for Women’s Policy Research).
Ellemers, N. (2018). Gender Stereotypes. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 69, 275–298.
Ellis, J., Fosdick, B.K., and Rasmussen, C. (2016). Women 1.5 Times More
Likely to Leave STEM Pipeline after Calculus Compared to Men: Lack of Mathematical Confidence a Potential Culprit. PLoS ONE 11, e0157447.

Guillory, E.A. (2001). The Black Professoriate: Explaining the salary gap for African-American female professors. Race Ethnicity and Education 4, 225–244.
Gunderson, E.A., Ramirez, G., Levine, S.C., and Beilock, S.L. (2012). The role
of parents and teachers in the development of gender-related math attitudes.
Sex Roles 66, 153–166.
Gupta, N., Kemelgor, C., Fuchs, S., and Etzkowitz, H. (2005). Triple burden on
women in science: A cross-cultural analysis. Curr. Sci. 89, 1382–1386.
Hanson, S.L., Sykes, M., and Pena, L.B. (2017). Gender Equity in Science: The
Global Context. Int. J. Soc. Sci. Stud. 6, 33–47.
Helmer, M., Schottdorf, M., Neef, A., and Battaglia, D. (2017). Gender bias in
scholarly peer review. eLife 6, 21718.
Hofstra, B., Kulkarni, V.V., Munoz-Najar Galvez, S., He, B., Jurafsky, D., and
McFarland, D.A. (2020). The Diversity-Innovation Paradox in Science. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 117, 9284–9291.

Else-Quest, N.M., Hyde, J.S., and Linn, M.C. (2010). Cross-national patterns of
gender differences in mathematics: a meta-analysis. Psychol. Bull. 136,
103–127.

Holman, L., Stuart-Fox, D., and Hauser, C.E. (2018). The gender gap in science: How long until women are equally represented? PLoS Biol. 16,
e2004956.

Fairhall, A.L., and Marder, E. (2020). Acknowledging female voices. Nat. Neurosci. 23, 904–905.

Hong, L., and Page, S.E. (2004). Groups of diverse problem solvers can
outperform groups of high-ability problem solvers. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 101, 16385–16389.

Fan, Y., Shepherd, L.J., Slavich, E., Waters, D., Stone, M., Abel, R., and Johnston, E.L. (2019). Gender and cultural bias in student evaluations: Why representation matters. PLoS ONE 14, e0209749.

Hope, J., Lemanski, C., Bastia, T., Moeller, N.I., and Williams, G. (2019). Childcare and Academia - an intervention. Int. Dev. Plan. Rev.

Favaro, B., Oester, S., Cigliano, J.A., Cornick, L.A., Hind, E.J., Parsons,
E.C.M., and Woodbury, T.J. (2016). Your Science Conference Should Have
a Code of Conduct. Front. Mar. Sci. 3, 103.

Huang, J., Gates, A.J., Sinatra, R., and Barabási, A.-L. (2020). Historical comparison of gender inequality in scientific careers across countries and disciplines. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 117, 4609–4616.

Fernandes, J.D., Sarabipour, S., Smith, C.T., Niemi, N.M., Jadavji, N.M., Kozik,
A.J., Holehouse, A.S., Pejaver, V., Symmons, O., Bisson Filho, A.W., and Haage, A. (2020). A survey-based analysis of the academic job market. eLife
9, 54097.

Hunt, J., Garant, J.-P., Herman, H., and Munroe, D.J. (2013). Why are women
underrepresented amongst patentees? Res. Policy 42, 831–843.

Fine, E., Sheridan, J., Carnes, M., Handelsman, J., Pribbenow, C., Savoy, J.,
and Wendt, A. (2014). Minimizing the influence of gender bias on the faculty
search process. In Gender Transformation in the Academy (Emerald Group
Publishing Limited), pp. 267–289.

Ingram, P., and Simons, T. (1995). Institutional and Resource Dependence Determinants of Responsiveness to Work-Family Issues. Acad. Manage. J. 38,
1466–1482.
James, A., Chisnall, R., and Plank, M.J. (2019). Gender and societies: a grassroots approach to women in science. R. Soc. Open Sci. 6, 190633.

Fiset, J., and Saffie-Robertson, M.C. (2020). The impact of gender and
perceived academic supervisory support on new faculty negotiation success.
High. Educ. Q. 74, 240–256.

Jensen, K., Kovács, B., and Sorenson, O. (2018). Gender differences in obtaining and maintaining patent rights. Nat. Biotechnol. 36, 307–309.

Fiske, S.T. (1998). Stereotyping, prejudice, and discrimination. In The Handbook of Social Psychology, Volume D, T. Gilbert, ed. (McGraw-Hill, x), pp. 1–2.

Johnson, B.W., and Smith, D.G. (2018). How Men Can Become Better
Allies to Women. https://hbr.org/2018/10/how-men-can-become-betterallies-to-women.

Flores, G.M. (2011). Latino/as in the hard sciences: Increasing Latina/o participation in science, technology, engineering and math (STEM) related fields.
Lat. Stud. 9, 327–335.

Jones, K., and Wilcher, B. (2019). Reducing Maternal Labor Market Detachment: A Role for Paid Family Leave (American University, Department of Economics).

Forscher, P.S., Lai, C.K., Axt, J.R., Ebersole, C.R., Herman, M., Devine, P.G.,
and Nosek, B.A. (2019). A meta-analysis of procedures to change implicit measures. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 117, 522.

Kalev, A., and Dobbin, F. (2020). Does Diversity Training Increase Corporate
Diversity? (Regulation Backlash and Regulatory Accountability).

Greenwald, A.G., and Banaji, M.R. (1995). Implicit social cognition: attitudes,
self-esteem, and stereotypes. Psychol. Rev. 102, 4–27.

Kalev, A., Dobbin, F., and Kelly, E. (2006). Best Practices or Best Guesses? Assessing the Efficacy of Corporate Affirmative Action and Diversity Policies. Am.
Sociol. Rev. 71, 589–617.

Greguletz, E., Diehl, M.-R., and Kreutzer, K. (2019). Why women build less
effective networks than men: The role of structural exclusion and personal hesitation. Hum. Relat. 72, 1234–1261.

Katz, J., and Moore, J. (2013). Bystander education training for campus sexual
assault prevention: an initial meta-analysis. Violence Vict. 28, 1054–1067.

Greider, C.W., Sheltzer, J.M., Cantalupo, N.C., Copeland, W.B., Dasgupta, N.,
Hopkins, N., Jansen, J.M., Joshua-Tor, L., McDowell, G.S., Metcalf, J.L., et al.
(2019). Increasing gender diversity in the STEM research workforce. Science
366, 692–695.

Kelly, C.D., and Jennions, M.D. (2006). The h index and career assessment by
numbers. Trends Ecol. Evol. 21, 167–170.
Kersey, A.J., Csumitta, K.D., and Cantlon, J.F. (2019). Gender similarities in the
brain during mathematics development. NPJ Sci. Learn. 4, 19.

Gruber, J., Mendle, J., Lindquist, K.A., Schmader, T., Clark, L.A., Bliss-Moreau, E., Akinola, M., Atlas, L., Barch, D.M., Barrett, L.F., et al. (2020). The
Future of Women in Psychological Science. Perspect. Psychol. Sci. 16,
483–516.

King, E.B., Huffman, A.H., and Peddie, C.I. (2013). LGBT Parents and the
Workplace. In LGBT-Parent Families: Innovations in Research and Implications for Practice, A.E. Goldberg and K.R. Allen, eds. (Springer), pp. 225–237.

Guarino, C.M., and Borden, V.M.H. (2017). Faculty Service Loads and Gender:
Are Women Taking Care of the Academic Family? Res. High. Educ. 58,
672–694.

Khazan, E., Borden, J., Johnson, S., and Greenhaw, L. (2019). Examining
gender bias in student evaluation of teaching for graduate teaching assistants.
NACTA J. 64, 430–435.

Neuron 109, July 7, 2021 2071

ll
Perspective
King, M.M., Bergstrom, C.T., Correll, S.J., Jacquet, J., and West, J.D. (2017).
Men set their own cites high: Gender and self-citation across fields and over
time. Socius 3, 237802311773890.
King, T.L., Shields, M., Byars, S., Kavanagh, A.M., Craig, L., and Milner, A.
(2020). Breadwinners and Losers: Does the Mental Health of Mothers, Fathers,
and Children Vary by Household Employment Arrangements? Evidence From
7 Waves of Data From the Longitudinal Study of Australian Children. Am. J. Epidemiol. 189, 1512–1520.
Knobloch-Westerwick, S., Glynn, C.J., and Huge, M. (2013). The Matilda Effect
in Science Communication: An Experiment on Gender Bias in Publication
Quality Perceptions and Collaboration Interest. Sci. Commun. 35, 603–625.

Marts, S. (2017). Open Secrets and Missing Stairs: Sexual and Gender-Based
Harassment at Scientific Meetings (SMARTS Consulting).
€ffmeier, J., Freund, P.A., Stuhlmacher, A.F., Bilke, L., and Hertel,
Mazei, J., Hu
G. (2015). A meta-analysis on gender differences in negotiation outcomes and
their moderators. Psychol. Bull. 141, 85–104.
McAllister, D., Juillerat, J., and Hunter, J. (2016). Funding: What stops women
getting more grants? Nature 529, 466.
McCullough, L. (2019). Proportions of women in STEM leadership in the academy in the USA. Educ. Sci. 10, 1.

Krawczyk, M., and Smyk, M. (2016). Author‫׳‬s gender affects rating of academic articles: Evidence from an incentivized, deception-free laboratory
experiment. Eur. Econ. Rev. 90, 326–335.

Meeussen, L., Van Laar, C., and Van Grootel, S. (2020). How to foster male
engagement in traditionally female communal roles and occupations: Insights
from research on gender norms and precarious manhood. Soc. Issues Policy
Rev. 14, 297–328.

Kray, L.J., and Kennedy, J.A. (2017). Changing the Narrative: Women as Negotiators—and Leaders. Calif. Manage. Rev. 60, 70–87.

Mengel, F., Sauermann, J., and Zölitz, U. (2018). Gender Bias in Teaching Evaluations. J. Eur. Econ. Assoc. 17, 535–566.

Kray, L.J., Thompson, L., and Galinsky, A. (2001). Battle of the sexes: gender
stereotype confirmation and reactance in negotiations. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol.
80, 942–958.

Miller, D.I., Eagly, A.H., and Linn, M.C. (2015). Women’s representation in science predicts national gender-science stereotypes: Evidence from 66 nations.
J. Educ. Psychol. 107, 631–644.

Kray, L.J., Kennedy, J.A., and Van Zant, A.B. (2014). Not competent enough to
know the difference? Gender stereotypes about women’s ease of being misled
predict negotiator deception. Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis. Process. 125, 61–72.

Misra, J., Lundquist, J.H., Holmes, E., and Agiomavritis, S. (2011). The ivory
ceiling of service work. Academe 97, 22–26.

Kray, L.J., Howland, L., Russell, A.G., and Jackman, L.M. (2017). The effects of
implicit gender role theories on gender system justification: Fixed beliefs
strengthen masculinity to preserve the status quo. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol.
112, 98–115.
Langin, K. (2018). In Are conferences providing enough child care support? We
decided to find out https://www.sciencemag.org/careers/2018/12/areconferences-providing-enough-child-care-support-we-decided-find-out.
Langin, K. (2019). How scientists are fighting against gender bias in conference
speaker lineups. ScienceMag. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.caredit.
aaw9742.
Lee, C.J., Sugimoto, C.R., Zhang, G., and Cronin, B. (2013). Bias in peer review. J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci. Technol. 64, 2–17.
Lerchenmueller, M.J., and Sorenson, O. (2018). The gender gap in early career
transitions in the life sciences. Res. Policy 47, 1007–1017.
Lerchenmueller, M.J., Sorenson, O., and Jena, A.B. (2019). Gender differences
in how scientists present the importance of their research: observational study.
BMJ 367, l6573.
Lim, S., and Cortina, L.M. (2005). Interpersonal mistreatment in the workplace:
the interface and impact of general incivility and sexual harassment. J. Appl.
Psychol. 90, 483–496.
Lincoln, A.E., Pincus, S., Koster, J.B., and Leboy, P.S. (2012). The matilda effect in science: awards and prizes in the US, 1990s and 2000s. Soc. Stud. Sci.
42, 307–320.
Luc, J.G.Y., Archer, M.A., Arora, R.C., Bender, E.M., Blitz, A., Cooke, D.T.,
Hlci, T.N., Kidane, B., Ouzounian, M., Varghese, T.K., Jr., and Antonoff, M.B.
(2021). Does Tweeting Improve Citations? One-Year Results From the TSSMN
Prospective Randomized Trial. Ann. Thorac. Surg. 111, 296–300.
Lunnemann, P., Jensen, M.H., and Jauffred, L. (2019). Gender bias in Nobel
prizes. Palgrave Commun. 5, 1–4.
Ma, Y., Oliveira, D.F.M., Woodruff, T.K., and Uzzi, B. (2019). Women who win
prizes get less money and prestige. Nature 565, 287–288.
MacNell, L., Driscoll, A., and Hunt, A.N. (2015). What’s in a Name: Exposing
Gender Bias in Student Ratings of Teaching. Innovative High. Educ. 40,
291–303.
Madera, J.M., Hebl, M.R., and Martin, R.C. (2009). Gender and letters of
recommendation for academia: agentic and communal differences. J. Appl.
Psychol. 94, 1591–1599.
Makarova, E., Aeschlimann, B., and Herzog, W. (2019). The gender gap in
STEM Fields: The impact of the gender stereotype of math and science on secondary students’ career aspirations. Front. Educ. 4, 60.

2072 Neuron 109, July 7, 2021

Moher, D., Naudet, F., Cristea, I.A., Miedema, F., Ioannidis, J.P.A., and
Goodman, S.N. (2018). Assessing scientists for hiring, promotion, and tenure.
PLoS Biol. 16, e2004089.
Morgan, A.C., Way, S.F., Hoefer, M.J.D., Larremore, D.B., Galesic, M., and
Clauset, A. (2021). The unequal impact of parenthood in academia. Sci. Adv.
7, eabd1996.
Morgenroth, T., Ryan, M.K., and Peters, K. (2015). The Motivational Theory of
Role Modeling: How Role Models Influence Role Aspirants’. Goals. Rev. Gen.
Psychol. 19, 465–483.
Morrissey, T. (2017). Child care and parent labor force participation: a review of
the research literature. Rev. Econ. Househ. 15, 1–24.
Moss-Racusin, C.A., Dovidio, J.F., Brescoll, V.L., Graham, M.J., and Handelsman, J. (2012). Science faculty’s subtle gender biases favor male students.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 109, 16474–16479.
Mulligan, A., Hall, L., and Raphael, E. (2013). Peer review in a changing world:
An international study measuring the attitudes of researchers. J. Am. Soc. Inf.
Sci. Technol. 64, 132–161.
Murray, D., Siler, K., Larivière, V., Chan, W.M., Collings, A.M., Raymond, J.,
and Sugimoto, C.R. (2019). Author-Reviewer Homophily in Peer Review. bioRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/400515.
Nair, S. (2014). Women of Color Faculty and the ‘‘Burden’’ of Diversity. Int.
Fem. J. Polit. 16, 497–500.
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (2018). Sexual
Harassment of Women: Climate, Culture, and Consequences in Academic
Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press). https://doi.org/10.17226/24994.
National Research Council (2009). Gender Differences at Critical Transitions in
the Careers of Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Faculty (Washington,
D.C.: The National Academies Press).
Niederle, M. (2017). A Gender Agenda: A Progress Report on Competitiveness.
Am. Econ. Rev. 107, 115–119.
Niederle, M., and Vesterlund, L. (2011). Gender and Competition. Annu. Rev.
Econ. 3, 601–630.
Niederle, M., Segal, C., and Vesterlund, L. (2013). How Costly Is Diversity?
Affirmative Action in Light of Gender Differences in Competitiveness. Manage.
Sci. 59, 1–16.
Nielsen, M.W. (2015). Make academic job advertisements fair to all. Nature
525, 427.
Nielsen, M.W. (2016). Limits to meritocracy? Gender in academic recruitment
and promotion processes. Sci. Public Policy 43, 386–399.

ll
Perspective
Nielsen, M.W., Alegria, S., Börjeson, L., Etzkowitz, H., Falk-Krzesinski, H.J.,
Joshi, A., Leahey, E., Smith-Doerr, L., Woolley, A.W., and Schiebinger, L.
(2017). Opinion: Gender diversity leads to better science. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 114, 1740–1742.

Roberson, L., Kulik, C.T., and Tan, R.Y. (2013). Effective Diversity Training. In
The Oxford Handbook of Diversity and Work, Q.M. Roberson, ed. (Oxford University Press).
Rodgers, P. (2017). Decisions, decisions. eLife 6, 32011.

Nielsen, M.W., Bloch, C.W., and Schiebinger, L. (2018). Making gender diversity work for scientific discovery and innovation. Nat. Hum. Behav. 2, 726–734.
Oliveira, D.F.M., Ma, Y., Woodruff, T.K., and Uzzi, B. (2019). Comparison of
National Institutes of Health Grant Amounts to First-Time Male and Female
Principal Investigators. JAMA 321, 898–900.
Page, S. (2008). The Difference: How the Power of Diversity Creates Better
Groups, Firms, Schools, and Societies (Princeton University Press).
Palser, E.R., Lazerwitz, M., and Fotopoulou, A. (2021). Gender and geographical disparity in editorial boards of journals in psychology and neuroscience.
bioRxiv. Published online February 16, 2021. https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.
02.15.431321.
Paluck, E.L., and Green, D.P. (2009). Prejudice reduction: what works? A review and assessment of research and practice. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 60,
339–367.
Paluck, E.L., Porat, R., Clark, C.S., and Green, D.P. (2021). Prejudice Reduction: Progress and Challenges. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 72, 533–560.
Parker, S.K., and Griffin, M.A. (2002). What is so bad about a little name-calling? Negative consequences of gender harassment for overperformance demands and distress. J. Occup. Health Psychol. 7, 195–210.
Parsons, E.C.M. (2015). So you think you want to run an environmental conservation meeting? Advice on the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune that
accompany academic conference planning. J. Environ. Stud. Sci. 5, 735–744.
Peterson, D.A.M., Biederman, L.A., Andersen, D., Ditonto, T.M., and Roe, K.
(2019). Mitigating gender bias in student evaluations of teaching. PLoS ONE
14, e0216241.
Pohlhaus, J.R., Jiang, H., Wagner, R.M., Schaffer, W.T., and Pinn, V.W. (2011).
Sex differences in application, success, and funding rates for NIH extramural
programs. Acad. Med. 86, 759–767.

Roehling, M.V., and Huang, J. (2018). Sexual harassment training effectiveness: An interdisciplinary review and call for research. J. Organ. Behav. 39,
134–150.
Schiebinger, L.L., Gilmartin, S.K., and Henderson, A.D. (2008). Dual-career academic couples: What universities need to know (Michelle R. Clayman Institute
for Gender Research, Stanford University).
Schilt, K., and Wiswall, M. (2008). Before and After: Gender Transitions, Human Capital, and Workplace Experiences. B.E. J. Econ. Anal. Policy 8, Article
39.
Schmader, T., Whitehead, J., and Wysocki, V.H. (2007). A Linguistic Comparison of Letters of Recommendation for Male and Female Chemistry and
Biochemistry Job Applicants. Sex Roles 57, 509–514.
Schneider, K.T., Swan, S., and Fitzgerald, L.F. (1997). Job-related and psychological effects of sexual harassment in the workplace: empirical evidence from
two organizations. J. Appl. Psychol. 82, 401–415.
Schroeder, J., Dugdale, H.L., Radersma, R., Hinsch, M., Buehler, D.M., Saul,
J., Porter, L., Liker, A., De Cauwer, I., Johnson, P.J., et al. (2013). Fewer invited
talks by women in evolutionary biology symposia. J. Evol. Biol. 26, 2063–2069.
Schrouff, J., Pischedda, D., Genon, S., Fryns, G., Pinho, A.L., Vassena, E.,
Liuzzi, A.G., and Ferreira, F.S. (2019). Gender bias in (neuro)science: Facts,
consequences, and solutions. Eur. J. Neurosci. 50, 3094–3100.
Shapiro, J.R., and Williams, A.M. (2012). The role of stereotype threats in
undermining girls’ and women’s performance and interest in STEM fields.
Sex Roles 66, 175–183.
Sheltzer, J.M., and Smith, J.C. (2014). Elite male faculty in the life sciences
employ fewer women. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 111, 10107–10112.
Small, D.A., Gelfand, M., Babcock, L., and Gettman, H. (2007). Who goes to
the bargaining table? The influence of gender and framing on the initiation of
negotiation. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 93, 600–613.

Potter, S.J., and Moynihan, M.M. (2011). Bringing in the Bystander in-person
prevention program to a U.S. military installation: results from a pilot study.
Mil. Med. 176, 870–875.

Smith, D.G., Turner, C.S.V., Osei-Kofi, N., and Richards, S. (2004). Interrupting
the Usual: Successful Strategies for Hiring Diverse Faculty. J. Higher Educ. 75,
133–160.

Potter, S.J., Flanagan, M., Seidman, M., Hodges, H., and Stapleton, J.G.
(2019). Developing and Piloting Videogames to Increase College and University Students’ Awareness and Efficacy of the Bystander Role in Incidents of
Sexual Violence. Games Health J. 8, 24–34.

Smith, J.L., Handley, I.M., Zale, A.V., Rushing, S., and Potvin, M.A. (2015). Now
Hiring! Empirically Testing a Three-Step Intervention to Increase Faculty
Gender Diversity in STEM. Bioscience 65, 1084–1087.

Powell, K. (2019). Why scientist-mums in the United States need better
parental-support policies. Nature 569, 149–151.

Smyth, F.L., and Nosek, B.A. (2015). On the gender-science stereotypes held
by scientists: explicit accord with gender-ratios, implicit accord with scientific
identity. Front. Psychol. 6, 415.

Preston, A.E. (2004). Plugging the Leaks in the Scientific Workforce. Issues
Sci. Technol. 20, 69–74.

Snodgrass, R. (2006). Single- versus double-blind reviewing: an analysis of the
literature. SIGMOD Rec. 35, 8–21.

(2018). Promoting diversity in neuroscience. Nat. Neurosci. 21, 1. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41593-017-0052-6.

Spencer, S.J., Steele, C.M., and Quinn, D.M. (1999). Stereotype Threat and
Women’s Math Performance. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 35, 4–28.

Régner, I., Thinus-Blanc, C., Netter, A., Schmader, T., and Huguet, P. (2019).
Committees with implicit biases promote fewer women when they do not
believe gender bias exists. Nat. Hum. Behav. 3, 1171–1179.
Reinholz, D.L., and Shah, N. (2018). Equity analytics: A methodological
approach for quantifying participation patterns in mathematics classroom
discourse. J. Res. Math. Educ. 49, 140–177.
Richey, C.R., Clancy, K.B.H., Lee, K.M., and Rodgers, E. (2015). The CSWA
Survey on Workplace Climate and an Uncomfortable Conversation about
Harassment (American Astronomical Society).
RissleR, L.J., Hale, K.L., Joffe, N.R., and Caruso, N.M. (2020). Gender Differences in Grant Submissions across Science and Engineering Fields at the
NSF. Bioscience 70, 814–820.
Rivera, L.A. (2017). When two bodies are (not) a problem: Gender and relationship status discrimination in academic hiring. Am. Sociol. Rev. 82, 1111–1138.

, A. (2017). Publishing: Journals could
Squazzoni, F., Grimaldo, F., and Marusic
share peer-review data. Nature 546, 352.
Squazzoni, F., Bravo, G., Farjam, M., Marusic, A., Mehmani, B., Willis, M., Birukou, A., Dondio, P., and Grimaldo, F. (2021). Peer review and gender bias: A
study on 145 scholarly journals. Sci. Adv. 7, eabd0299.
Stark, P., and Freishtat, R. (2014). An evaluation of course evaluations. ScienceOpen Res. 0, 1–7.
Steinpreis, R.E., Anders, K.A., and Ritzke, D. (1999). The Impact of Gender on
the Review of the Curricula Vitae of Job Applicants and Tenure Candidates: A
National Empirical Study. Sex Roles 41, 509–528.
Stewart, A.J., and Valian, V. (2018). An Inclusive Academy: Achieving Diversity
and Excellence (MIT Press).
Sugimoto, C.R., Ni, C., West, J.D., and Larivière, V. (2015). The academic
advantage: gender disparities in patenting. PLoS ONE 10, e0128000.

Neuron 109, July 7, 2021 2073

ll
Perspective
Sumner, J.L. (2018). The Gender Balance Assessment Tool (GBAT): A WebBased Tool for Estimating Gender Balance in Syllabi and Bibliographies. PS
Polit. Sci. Polit. 51, 396–400.
Sweet, D.J. (2021). New at Cell Press: The Inclusion and Diversity Statement.
Cell 184, 1–2.
Thompson, S., and Parry, P. (2017). Coping with Gender Inequities: Critical
Conversations of Women Faculty (Rowman and Littlefield).
Tomkins, A., Zhang, M., and Heavlin, W.D. (2017). Reviewer bias in singleversus double-blind peer review. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 114,
12708–12713.
Tzovara, A., Amarreh, I., Borghesani, V., Chakravarty, M.M., DuPre, E.,
Grefkes, C., Haugg, A., Jollans, L., Lee, H.W., Newman, S.D., et al. (2021).
Embracing diversity and inclusivity in an academic setting: Insights from the
Organization for Human Brain Mapping. Neuroimage 229, 117742.
Valantine, H.A., Grewal, D., Ku, M.C., Moseley, J., Shih, M.-C., Stevenson, D.,
and Pizzo, P.A. (2014). The gender gap in academic medicine: comparing results from a multifaceted intervention for stanford faculty to peer and national
cohorts. Acad. Med. 89, 904–911.
van den Brink, M. (2010). Behind the Scenes of Science: Gender Practices in
the Recruitment and Selection of Professors in the Netherlands (Amsterdam
University Press).
van den Brink, M., Benschop, Y., and Jansen, W. (2010). Transparency in academic recruitment: A problematic tool for gender equality? Organ. Stud. 31,
1459–1483.
Viglione, G. (2020). Are women publishing less during the pandemic? Here’s
what the data say. Nature 581, 365–366.
Waisbren, S.E., Bowles, H., Hasan, T., Zou, K.H., Emans, S.J., Goldberg, C.,
Gould, S., Levine, D., Lieberman, E., Loeken, M., et al. (2008). Gender differ-

2074 Neuron 109, July 7, 2021

ences in research grant applications and funding outcomes for medical school
faculty. J. Womens Health (Larchmt.) 17, 207–214.
Weisshaar, K. (2017). Publish and perish? An assessment of gender gaps in
promotion to tenure in academia. Soc. Forces 96, 529–560.
West, J.D., Jacquet, J., King, M.M., Correll, S.J., and Bergstrom, C.T. (2013).
The role of gender in scholarly authorship. PLoS ONE 8, e66212.
Whittington, K.B., and Smith-Doerr, L. (2008). Women Inventors in Context:
Disparities in Patenting across Academia and Industry. Gend. Soc. 22,
194–218.
Williams, W.M., and Ceci, S.J. (2015). National hiring experiments reveal 2:1
faculty preference for women on STEM tenure track. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 112, 5360–5365.
Witteman, H.O., Hendricks, M., Straus, S., and Tannenbaum, C. (2019). Are
gender gaps due to evaluations of the applicant or the science? A natural
experiment at a national funding agency. Lancet 393, 531–540.
(2006). Women in neuroscience: a numbers game. Nat Neurosci 9, 853.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nn0706-853.
Woolston, C. (2020). Male authors boost research impact through self-hyping
studies. Nature 578, 328.
Zhou, D., Cornblath, E.J., Stiso, J., Teich, E.G., Dworkin, J.D., Blevins, A.S.,
and Bassett, D.S. (2020). Gender Diversity Statement and Code Notebook
v1.0. Zenodo.
Zhu, J.M., Pelullo, A.P., Hassan, S., Siderowf, L., Merchant, R.M., and Werner,
R.M. (2019). Gender Differences in Twitter Use and Influence Among Health
Policy and Health Services Researchers. JAMA Intern. Med. 179, 1726–1729.
Zinovyeva, N., and Bagues, M.F. (2011). Does gender matter for academic
promotion? Evidence from a randomized natural experiment (IZA Discussion
Papers).

