Immunity

Article
Gender Bias in Autoimmunity
Is Influenced by Microbiota
Leonid Yurkovetskiy,1,2,9 Michael Burrows,2,3,9 Aly A. Khan,4,5,9 Laura Graham,2 Pavel Volchkov,2 Lev Becker,6
Dionysios Antonopoulos,4,7 Yoshinori Umesaki,8 and Alexander V. Chervonsky2,3,*
1Committee

on Microbiology
of Pathology
3Committee on Immunology
4Institute for Genomics and Systems Biology
5Department of Human Genetics
6Department of Pediatrics
The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA
7Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, IL 60439, USA
8Yakult Central Institute for Microbiological Research, Yakult Central Institute for Microbiological Research, Yaho 1796, Kunitachi,
Tokyo 186-8650, Japan
9These authors contributed equally to this work
*Correspondence: achervon@bsd.uchicago.edu
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2013.08.013
2Department

SUMMARY

Gender bias and the role of sex hormones in autoimmune diseases are well established. In specific pathogen-free nonobese diabetic (NOD) mice, females
have 1.3–4.4 times higher incidence of type 1 diabetes (T1D). Germ-free (GF) mice lost the gender
bias (female-to-male ratio 1.1–1.2). Gut microbiota
differed in males and females, a trend reversed by
male castration, confirming that androgens influence
gut microbiota. Colonization of GF NOD mice with
defined microbiota revealed that some, but not all,
lineages overrepresented in male mice supported a
gender bias in T1D. Although protection of males
did not correlate with blood androgen concentration,
hormone-supported expansion of selected microbial
lineages may work as a positive-feedback mechanism contributing to the sexual dimorphism of
autoimmune diseases. Gene-expression analysis
suggested pathways involved in protection of males
from T1D by microbiota. Our results favor a twosignal model of gender bias, in which hormones
and microbes together trigger protective pathways.

INTRODUCTION
Sexual dimorphism is a characteristic feature of many major
autoimmune diseases (Fish, 2008; Whitacre, 2001). In most
cases, females have higher incidence and/or severity of the disease. Sex hormones play a pivotal role in the gender bias with a
commonly accepted view that androgens are protective. Castration of males enhances disease progression in animal models of
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) (Roubinian et al., 1978) and
type 1 diabetes (T1D) (Makino et al., 1981), whereas castration of
females has variable effects (Fitzpatrick et al., 1991; Makino
400 Immunity 39, 400–412, August 22, 2013 ª2013 Elsevier Inc.

et al., 1981). Supplementation of females with androgens leads
to their protection from these diseases (Fox, 1992; Roubinian
et al., 1978), and hormone therapy is used in human SLE patients
(Kanda et al., 1997).
However, the hormonal influence on the sexual dimorphism of
T1D in nonobese diabetic (NOD) mice appears to be sensitive to
environmental influences: T1D incidence varies between institutions (Pozzilli et al., 1993) and even with time within the same
institution (Table 1). Most importantly, germ-free (GF) NOD
animals have much smaller differences in T1D incidence
between genders: an independent rederivation of NOD/ShiLTJ
mice into GF conditions resulted in remarkably similar incidence
of T1D to that previously reported by our group (Table 1). Given
the wide variation in T1D incidence and the female-to-male ratio
of affected mice, these results lead to two conclusions: first,
that the environmental settings and variations in commensal
microbiota influence gender bias in NOD animals, and second,
that the influence is likely affected by the composition of the
microbiota. Thus, there likely exists an unknown interaction
between known hormonal influences (Kovats and Carreras,
2008) and known microbial influences on T1D (Mathis and
Benoist, 2012).
Three models can explain these results. Linear model A suggests that hormones regulate the microbes (either through
immune or metabolic mechanisms) and that microbes then
activate the protective effector mechanisms. Linear model B
suggests that microbes are regulators of hormonal metabolism
and that the hormones are the actual effectors. Finally, both
microbiota and hormones could contribute in an additive fashion
to the effector mechanisms (two-signal model C). To test these
models, we used high-throughput sequencing of male, female,
and castrated male microbiota, reconstitution of GF animals
with candidate microbiota revealed by sequencing, and geneexpression analysis of the pancreatic lymph nodes (PLN) from
GF and specific pathogen-free (SPF) males and females.
Whereas the hormone-dependent differences in microbiota
composition were readily detectable, not all microbes that
expanded in males were capable of protecting them from T1D.

Immunity
Hormones and Microbes Jointly Reduce Autoimmunity

Table 1. Gender Bias of T1D in NOD Colonies
Institution

Female (F)

Male (M)

Ratio F/M

25%

2.4

SPF Facilities
U of Chicago

60%

Yale 2008 (Wen et al., 2008)

90%

70%

1.3

Taconic 2009a

80%

50%

1.6

10%–15%

4.4

Harvard 2011 (Kriegel
et al., 2011)

50%–60%

2002b

75%

50%

1.5

2003b

85%

60%

1.4

2004b

90%

45%

2.0

b

2005

80%

40%

2.0

2006b

65%

35%

1.9

2007b

100%

65%

1.5

2008b

90%

85%

1.1

2009b

90%

65%

1.4

Taconic 2008 (Wen
et al., 2008)

100%

85%

1.2

U of Chicago 2012

95%

84%

1.1

Germ-Free Facilities

Cumulative incidence of diabetes in NOD mice at 30 weeks of age.
a
Taconic Farms NOD incidence study (http://www.taconic.com/
user-assets/Documents/Products%20and%20Services/Animal%
20Models/NOD_Onset_2009.pdf).
b
T1DR-T1D repository at The Jackson Laboratory. Data available at
http://type1diabetes.jax.org/gqc_incidence_studies.html.

Although colonized animals showed higher blood testosterone
concentrations compared to GF animals, there was no strict correlation between the ability to induce testosterone and protection from T1D. Gene-expression analysis and genetic data suggested that at least one protective mechanism was mediated by
a proinflammatory cytokine, interferon-g (IFN-g). Thus, our results favor a model in which signals from both hormones and microbes are integrated for prevention of the disease development.
RESULTS
Differences in Microbial Composition in Males and
Females Are Driven by Hormones
Hormonal regulation of the microbe-controlling mechanisms
predicts that commensal composition should be different
between the two genders. To test this, we compared the microbial communities in male and female mice before and after
puberty. Mice were separated at 4 weeks and single-housed to
prevent microbiota exchange. Bacterial DNA from the cecal contents of 4-week-old (prepubescent) mice and 10- to 13-week-old
(postpubescent) was subjected to high-throughput sequencing
and subsequent annotation of the 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA)
encoding genes.
First, we asked whether the representation of different lineages of commensal microbes differed between these animals.
The a-diversity (number of microbial species in a given sample)
was not significantly different between the genders in 4-weekold mice. On the contrary, postpubescent mice harbored
gender-biased microbial communities (Figure 1A).

Second, principal component analysis (PCA) was performed
to determine whether differences in abundance of bacterial
families in pre- and postpubescent mice reflected gender bias
(Figure 1B). The first and second principal components, explaining 75%–80% of the total variance in both groups, only segregated the 10-week-old mice by gender and not the 4-week-old
mice. The comparison of postpubescent males and females to
prepubescent mice revealed that males deviated from the
initially acquired microbiota with time, whereas the adult female
microbiota stayed similar to the input microbiota of young mice
(Figure 1C). We repeated the sequencing experiment with an
independent group of animals and confirmed that postpubescent mice had more differences associated with gender
compared to prepubescent mice (data not shown).
To test whether removal of the androgen source by castration
would drive male microbiota closer to female microbiota, we
sequenced 16S rRNA genes from microbiota of male, female,
and castrated male littermates. Although the number of experimental animals was naturally limited by the size of the litter, the
PCA analysis indicated that female and castrated male microbiota were closer to each other than to male microbiota
(Figure 1D).
Finally, to eliminate possible adverse influences of the SPF
environment on microbiota composition, we colonized GF
mice with microbiota from an SPF female and compared male
versus female microbiota after puberty. PCA analysis again
distinctly segregated male and female microbiota (Figure 1E).
The first and second principal components explained 90% of
the total variance in these experiments.
Thus, it is fair to conclude that male microbiota composition
deviates more from the input microbiota and that this deviation
is indeed hormone dependent.
Input Microbiota Defines the Gender-Specific Changes
in Microbiota
An important question is whether male hormones support or
inhibit specific microbial lineages in a reproducible manner or
whether the differences depend on the input microbiota
(inherited from mother and coming from the environment).
Thus, we compared the abundance of microbial families
between adult males and females in four independent experiments. In the first experiment, an unbiased differential analysis
of bacterial families showed an expansion of Porphyromonadaceae family (from the Bacteroidetes phylum) in males, which
also corresponded to the largest coefficient in the first principal
component of this experiment. Further unbiased screening of
differences in abundance of bacterial families revealed Veillonellaceae and Kineosporiaceae to be also differentially abundant in
males (Figure 1F). Interestingly, the second experiment where
NOD mice from an independent set of parents were tested at
13 weeks of age revealed a very different overall commensal
composition (Figure 1F; see also Figure S2 available online)
with Peptococcaceae and Enterobacteriaceae dominance in
males. Furthermore, in the third experiment, males had more
abundant Lactobacillaceae compared to females or castrated
males (Figure 1F), which also corresponded to the largest
coefficient in the first principal component of this experiment
(Figure 1D). Finally, in the experiment with colonization of GF
mice, unbiased differential analysis revealed additional new
Immunity 39, 400–412, August 22, 2013 ª2013 Elsevier Inc. 401

Immunity
Hormones and Microbes Jointly Reduce Autoimmunity

Figure 1. Gender-Related Differences in Commensal Microbiota Composition
(A) Alpha diversity of microbiota from 4-week-old and 10-week-old mice, grouped by gender, mean ± SEM. Significance of changes in diversity between genders
is reported with a nonparametric Mann-Whitney test.
(B) Principal component analysis of microbiota diversity at the family level from 4-week-old (eight males, eight females), and 10-week-old mice (seven males,
seven females).
(C) Hierarchical clustering of 16S sequences of cecal samples from 4-week-old and 10-week-old male and female mice were performed with the Euclidean
distance metric and clustering by average linkage. The dendrogram shows the linkage points at increasing degree of dissimilarity.
(D) Principal component analysis of microbiota diversity at the family level from 13-week-old littermate mice, three females, three males, and three castrated
males.

402 Immunity 39, 400–412, August 22, 2013 ª2013 Elsevier Inc.

(legend continued on next page)

Immunity
Hormones and Microbes Jointly Reduce Autoimmunity

bacterial families differentially expressed between males and
females, including Cytophagaceae, Peptostreptococcaceae,
and Bacteroidaceae (Figure 1F).
Thus, the existence of a postpubescent gender bias in microbial diversity and representation of individual families became
evident. However, the lack of consistent microbial variability
between all experiments suggests that this variability is likely
dependent on the input microbiota. This finding offers an explanation for the variation in T1D gender bias between animal facilities (Pozzilli et al., 1993) (Table 1) and makes two important
predictions: (1) different microbes could be important for protection in males, and (2) some of the changes may be driven by the
same mechanisms but are functionally irrelevant for protection
from diabetes. The only definitive way to test these predictions
was to use a gnotobiotic approach.
Only Selected Microbes Support Gender Bias in
Gnotobiotic NOD Mice
To address the requirement for specific microbiota for induction
of gender bias, GF parents were inoculated with different
microbes and bred within the isolators. Their progeny were either
observed for T1D development or used at 12–13 weeks of age
for analysis of the severity of mononuclear infiltration. The selection of microorganisms was based on the results of comparison
of the male and female microbiota composition. The histopathology approach (Figures 2A and 2B) was adequate because it
revealed a strong gender bias in SPF mice and a decrease in
the gender bias in GF mice (Figures 2A and 2C) corresponding
perfectly with the incidence of T1D in these groups. Representative images of islet infiltration are shown in Figure S2. First, we
colonized GF mice with the probiotic mix VSL3 (Calcinaro
et al., 2005), which is enriched in Lactobacillaceae and Bifidobacteria, because Lactobacillaceae were enhanced in males in
one of the sequencing experiments. However, VSL3 did not
reduce the severity of histopathology in males or females (Figure 2B); if anything, it was enhanced by VSL3. Thus, VSL3 was
not capable of inducing the gender bias compared to the
undefined SPF community.
In the second microbiota comparison experiment, Enterobacteriacae family (phylum Proteobacteria) was found amplified in
males (Figure 1F). Colonization of GF mice with a proteobacterium that was cultured from males (Figure S2B) and had 16S
rRNA gene sequence ‘‘similar to E. coli and Shigella’’ (SECS)
led to a clear decrease in histopathology in males (Figure 2B).
Finally, we tested whether segmented filamentous bacteria
(SFB), known for their proinflammatory properties (GaboriauRouthiau et al., 2009; Ivanov et al., 2009) and reported to be
associated with protection in SPF mice (Kriegel et al., 2011),
would protect animals from T1D. The efficiency of colonization
with SFB was comparable between the two genders (Figure S2),
but there was no influence on T1D incidence in females (Figure 2C). The T1D incidence in males (Figure 2D) was significantly
reduced compared to both GF males (p = 0.005) and SFB-colonized females (p = 0.002). Thus, under our experimental condi-

tions, another single bacterium, SFB, was capable of supporting
the gender bias.
Because both genders of myeloid differentiation primary
response gene 88 (MyD88)-negative NOD mice are protected
under normal conditions (Wen et al., 2008), it was likely that
the protection offered by the gender-bias mechanism is different
from the protection offered by the microbiota in MyD88-negative
mice. Thus, we colonized GF MyD88-deficient NOD mice with
SFB (Figure 2E). Gender bias was preserved in MyD88-deficient
mice colonized with SFB. The data argue that MyD88 is dispensable for the gender bias and that distinct bacteria trigger the two
protective mechanisms.
Microbiota Elevates Androgens to the Threshold
Required for Protection
Earlier studies have established that both testosterone (Makino
et al., 1981) and microbes (Wen et al., 2008) were involved in
the gender bias of T1D in NOD mice. Now that the genderspecific differences in microbiota were found to be androgen
dependent (Figure 1D), it was critical to determine whether the
ability of microbiota to induce gender bias correlated with its
ability to increase androgen concentration. Thus, we measured
serum testosterone in SPF and GF mice, as well as in gnotobiotic
mice. The elevated amounts of testosterone correlated with
colonization with conventional microbiota and with SFB and
SECS. At the same time, colonization with VSL3 did not cause
a rise in testosterone concentration (Figure 3A). Thus, it would
seem that the linear model B supports the observed T1D progression. However, it was critical to determine whether a testosterone threshold necessary for protection could be reached and
whether higher testosterone provided better protection. When
the severity of islet infiltration was plotted against testosterone
concentration in the same mice (Figure 3B), it became clear
that after serum testosterone reached a certain concentration
(less than 2 ng/ml), a further increase was not required for
protection against T1D by microbes capable of providing a protective signal.
Gene-Expression Analysis Reveals Possible Signaling
Networks Involved in the Gender Bias of T1D
To address the question of which signaling pathways may be
affected by both gender and microbiota, we compared geneexpression patterns in the pancreatic lymph nodes (PLN), critical
for T1D development (Gagnerault et al., 2002; Höglund et al.,
1999; Turley et al., 2005). Only one group out of four (two genders
in SPF and GF conditions, respectively) was protected from
T1D—the SPF males. Thus, we performed a series of set operations to identify genes that were specifically regulated by
microbes in males (Figure 4A). First, genes with similar expression between SPF males and GF females were removed,
followed by removal of similarities between SPF and GF males,
and, finally, genes that are different between SPF and GF
females were removed from the list. The resulting expression
pattern of about 40 genes (Figure 4B) was organized into a

(E) Principal component analysis of microbiota diversity at the family level from 13-week-old gnotobiotic littermate mice colonized with an SPF microbiota at birth.
(F) Relative abundances of bacterial families between male and female mice. Mean and SE are marked for each family and significance (p value) is calculated with
one-tailed t test. q values obtained by Benjamini-Hochberg approach to adjust for false discovery rate were above 0.05 in most cases (data not shown) except
experiment 4. See also Figure S1.

Immunity 39, 400–412, August 22, 2013 ª2013 Elsevier Inc. 403

Immunity
Hormones and Microbes Jointly Reduce Autoimmunity

Figure 2. Influence of Microbial Lineages
on the Gender Bias in T1D Development in
NOD Mice
(A) Histopathology (percentage of islets with
infiltrates beyond peri-insulitis) in 13-week-old
mice from male and female SPF NOD mice, from
males castrated at 4 weeks of age, and from GF
male and female mice. Data are represented as
mean insulitis score ± SEM, and 30% infiltration
was chosen as an arbitrary threshold.
(B) Histopathology in 13-week-old gnotobiotic
NOD mice reconstituted with indicated microbiota. Data are represented as mean insulitis
score ± SEM. Germ-free mice were reconstituted
by natural acquisition of microbes from parents
infected by gastric gavage during breeding.
(C) Diabetes incidence in NOD GF female mice
and in gnotobiotic NOD female mice monocolonized with SFB.
(D) Diabetes incidence in NOD GF male mice and
in gnotobiotic NOD male mice monocolonized
with SFB. The differences between SFB-colonized
and GF males were significant (p = 0.005), as well
as between SFB-colonized females and males
(p = 0.002).
(E) Diabetes incidence in MyD88-negative NOD
gnotobiotic mice monocolonized with SFB. n
represents the number of mice per group. p values
for incidence were determined with Kaplan-Meier
statistics, for histopathology by Student’s t test.
See also Figure S2.

network of signaling pathways with the STRING database
(Szklarczyk et al., 2011). The signatures of the two specific pathways became apparent: IFN-g and interleukin-1b (IL-1b) (Figure 4C). Because PLNs are complex organs, we asked what
cell type was critical for the gene-expression pattern that we
have detected. For that, we generated a gene abundance profile
comparing the expression of about 40 genes with the geneexpression patterns from a panel of 96 cell types from the
BioGPS murine RNA Gene Expression Atlas (http://biogps.gnf.
org). Hierarchical clustering associated this expression pattern
with the monocyte-macrophage cell lineage (Figure 5A; Figure S3). Additionally, an upregulation of Chitinase-3-like protease 1 gene (Chi3l-1) suggested a more abundant presence of
the tolerogenic ‘‘alternatively activated’’ or M2 macrophages
(Gordon and Taylor, 2005; Loke et al., 2002; Raes et al., 2002)
in SPF males. The representation of macrophages with M2 surface markers was compared between SPF males and females by
staining of PLN cells liberated by collagenase. More M2 type
macrophages (as determined by the numbers of cells positive
for transferrin receptor [Becker et al., 2012; Johnston et al.,
2012] and CD206 [Gordon and Martinez, 2010; Stein et al.,
1992] and by intensity of CD206 expression) were found in the
male mice (Figure 5B).
Available Gene-Targeting Data Support the Involvement
of the Discovered Network in Male Protection from T1D
The best support for importance of the gene-expression data
comes from genetic-ablation experiments. Publicly available
reports (compilation of the data based on the Type 1 Diabetes
Resource, T1DR, at the Jackson Laboratory) on male and female
incidence in the relevant gene-targeted mice showed that the
404 Immunity 39, 400–412, August 22, 2013 ª2013 Elsevier Inc.

loss of IFN-g signaling removes the gender bias from T1D (Figure 6A). NOD mice with targeted deletions of genes encoding
IFN-g, IFN-g-receptor-1, and of the downstream signaling molecule STAT4, all had similar incidence of T1D in females and males
at 30 weeks of age. During the same time period in the same
facility, NOD mice negative for IL-12, IL-10, and IL-4 continued
to exhibit gender-biased autoimmunity (Figure 6A). Genetic
deletion of Casp1, which is necessary for the cleavage of inactive
pro-IL-1b (and of pro-IL-18), has been reported to lead to higher
incidence in males compared to males derived from the same
backcrossing experiment (Schott et al., 2004). The female incidence was not affected by the lack of Caspase-1. These results
strongly support our findings of potential involvement of IFN-g
and IL-1b in the gender-biased protection from T1D.
IFN-g Production in Regional Lymph Nodes Is Enhanced
in NOD Males
To further study the importance of IFN-g in mediating the gender
bias in NOD mice, we tested its expression in the pancreatic
lymph nodes by measuring the amounts of protein and IFN-gencoding messenger RNA (Figures 6B and 6C). Higher concentrations of IFN-g were found in SPF males compared to SPF
females, and its amounts in GF mouse PLNs were much lower
(Figure 6B). The same was true for the SFB-monocolonized
mice (Figure 6B). The amounts of IFN-g in the male PLNs
measured at 12 weeks of age were severely reduced after
castration at 4 weeks of age (Figure 6B). IFN-g-specific RNA
expression measured by quantitative PCR was significantly
higher in PLN of the postpubescent males (Figure 6C).
We then asked whether there were more IFN-g-producing
cells among CD4+ and CD8+ T cells in the PLNs of male mice.

Immunity
Hormones and Microbes Jointly Reduce Autoimmunity

Figure 3. Microbiota and Blood Testosterone Concentrations
(A) The blood testosterone concentrations of the
13-week-old GF, SPF, and gnotobiotic males and
females of indicated ages. Mean testosterone
concentration ± SEM. Blood samples were
collected between 10 am and 12 pm. The
following abbreviations are used: C, castrated;
MC, mock-castrated males.
(B) Islet histopathology in mice that demonstrated
no gender bias (GF and VSL3 populated, open
squares) and that demonstrated gender bias (SPF
and SECS populated, black squares) plotted
against blood testosterone concentrations. Data
compiled from four experiments.

provide necessary signals to host cells
that also receive a second signal from androgens. Together, these signals control
the gender bias in T1D development in
NOD mice.
DISCUSSION

Lymph node cells were activated with phorbol myristate acetate
(PMA) and ionomycin in vitro and stained for surface markers and
intracellular IFN-g. Male PLNs (as well as mesenteric nodes, but
not spleens; Figure S4) contained significantly more IFN-g-producing T cells than PLNs of female and castrated male mice (Figure 6D). Enhanced production of IFN-g by T cells in males could
result from direct signaling by hormones and/or microbes or
reflect the influence of these signals on antigen-presenting cells.
Because most of the microbiota-dependent gene expression differences between males and females pointed at macrophagemonocyte as a critical cell lineage (Figure 5A), we asked whether
macrophages from males and females were equally capable of
eliciting an IFN-g response from T cells. Peritoneal macrophages
from male, female, and Ifng/ male mice were either pretreated
with heat-inactivated SECS bacteria or not, washed, and insulinspecific CD8+ T cells from G9C8 T cell receptor transgenic mice
(Varanasi et al., 2012) were added along with a cognate peptide.
Only macrophages exposed to bacteria elicited IFN-g from the
T cells, and male macrophages were clearly more efficient in doing so than female macrophages (Figure 6E).
In sum, our results show that despite expansion of multiple
microbial lineages in male NOD mice, only some lineages can

The importance of the intestinal
commensal microbiota for development
of T1D has been clearly demonstrated in
NOD mice lacking the MyD88 signaling
adaptor (Wen et al., 2008). Importantly,
GF NOD mice used in these experiments
lose the commonly observed gender bias
(enhanced T1D development in females).
Thus, it became clear that hormones and
microbiota interact to modify the course
of the disease progression (Figure S5).
We sought to test the three models explaining the mechanisms behind the
gender bias. Sequencing of 16S rRNA genes from male and female
mice revealed that the microbiota can be gender-biased and that
the adult female microbiota is more similar to the microbiota of prepubescent mice of both genders than the male microbiota. Thus,
puberty affects the male microbiota composition, which becomes
less diverse than the female microbiota. Importantly, comparison
of male, female, and castrated male microbiota demonstrated that
sex hormones rather than X chromosome-associated factors were
important for the change in microbiota composition.
To test whether microbial deviations seen in male mice were
meaningful (capable of protecting colonized mice), we used a
gnotobiotic approach. If the first model was correct, one would
expect microbes enhanced in male NOD mice to be protective
in both male and female mice. However, mice mono-colonized
with SECS proteobacteria demonstrated a protective effect in
males only. Similarly, mono-colonization with SFB led to
gender-biased protection measured by T1D incidence and islet
pathology. These observations did not fit well with the model in
which hormones regulated microbes and microbes were the
effectors challenging autoimmunity. If that hypothesis were
true, we would expect the protective effect to become unbiased
in terms of gender.
Immunity 39, 400–412, August 22, 2013 ª2013 Elsevier Inc. 405

Immunity
Hormones and Microbes Jointly Reduce Autoimmunity

Figure 4. Analysis of the Changes in Gene Expression Driven by Microbes and Gender
(A) SPF and GF NOD males and females were used as donors of the PLN. Of the four groups only one (SPF males) is protected from T1D. The logic of arrival at the
gene set IV, specific to this group, is shown.
(B) Heatmap of expression of the genes from set IV. The intensity of the color corresponds to the strength of expression relative to the mean expression across all
conditions.
(C) Gene set IV organized in a network with the STRING database. Genes encoding IFN-g and IL-1b are highlighted in yellow.

Interestingly, VSL3 has been previously reported to be protective in female NOD mice upon continuous application via oral
gavage (Calcinaro et al., 2005). It is possible that VSL3 works
in concert with the complex SPF microbiota to elicit protection,
but such a protection could be mediated by a non-genderbiased mechanism. SFB have been previously associated with
protection in female SPF NOD mice (Kriegel et al., 2011). The
disparity of the results could be due to an interaction of SFB
with other members of the microbial community (absent in our
facility) to provide non-gender-biased protection or by variation
in SFB strains themselves.
These experiments also demonstrated that not all androgendriven changes in microbiota are meaningful in terms of supporting the gender bias in T1D and provide an additional argument in
favor of the gnotobiotic experimental approach. Finally, they also
406 Immunity 39, 400–412, August 22, 2013 ª2013 Elsevier Inc.

made it clear that many microbial lineages are capable of
supporting the gender bias. In fact, our colony of NOD mice
was SFB-free but exhibited the gender bias.
Although SPF and some gnotobiotic mice had higher blood
testosterone concentrations compared to females and GF
mice, it was likely that a certain threshold of testosterone concentration should be achieved before it is able to aid bacteria
in eliciting protection from T1D. A general argument in favor of
the threshold requirement is that testosterone amounts in males
are highly variable during the day (Bartke et al., 1973). Moreover,
GF male rats have slightly higher testosterone amounts compared to SPF male rats (Snyder and Wostmann, 1985), and blood
testosterone concentrations in GF males entering puberty at
5 weeks of age were higher compared to SPF males, suggesting
that microbiota can also negatively regulate testosterone. In

Immunity
Hormones and Microbes Jointly Reduce Autoimmunity

Figure 5. Microbes and Gender Affect Gene Expression in Cells of the Monocyte-Macrophage Lineage
(A) Many genes belonging to set IV (Figure 4A) have a signature characteristic of macrophages (highlighted in yellow) as determined by comparison to BioGPS
murine RNA Gene Expression Atlas data. The intensity of the color corresponds to the strength of expression relative to the mean expression across all cell types.
The complete expression map can be found in Figure S3.
(B) Enhanced presence of alternatively activated macrophages in age-matched adult male SFP mice compared to SPF female mice. CD11b+F4/80+ macrophages were stained with antibodies to transferrin receptor (TFRC, left panel) or to CD206. An example of CD206 staining is shown along with quantitation of both
CD206+ cell number and the mean fluorescence intensity (MFI). Three to five mice per group were used in these experiments. Data representative of two to three
independent experiments. Data are represented as mean cell number or MFI ± SEM.

addition to these arguments, we have previously reported (Wen
et al., 2008) that gnotobiotic male NOD mice carrying the Altered
Schaedler’s Flora (ASF) (Dewhirst et al., 1999) microbial con-

sortium did not show a reduction in T1D incidence (78% at
30 weeks, compared to 84% in germ-free males) and the incidence curves were not significantly different (p = 0.48), very
Immunity 39, 400–412, August 22, 2013 ª2013 Elsevier Inc. 407

Immunity
Hormones and Microbes Jointly Reduce Autoimmunity

similar to a recently published experiment (Markle et al., 2013), in
which ASF does not significantly protect gnotobiotic NOD males
from T1D. However, ASF was perfectly capable of increasing
blood testosterone concentration in associated male mice to
an average of 5 ng/ml. Thus, a consortium with a poor ability to
induce the gender bias supports enhancement of testosterone.
Plotting islet pathology versus testosterone concentration
suggested that when the threshold is achieved, it is the nature
of the microbial stimulus that matters, once again supporting
the two-signal hypothesis and suggesting that androgen
enhancement by microbiota is not enough to explain how the
gender bias works.
The ability of microbes to regulate hormones and of hormones
to change microbial diversity cannot be simply discarded and
must be taken into account. In a modified gender bias model,
hormone enhancement and maintenance of a gender-biased
microbiota provide a regulatory feedback loop needed to maintain the gender bias of T1D protection. It is also likely that in
complex microbial communities, the functions of hormone
enhancement and provision of regulatory signals to the immune
system could be divided between different members of the
community.
What are the protective mechanisms that are induced by
hormones and microbes? Gene-expression analysis has
revealed possible signaling mechanisms that are involved in
the process. Two points need to be made clear: (1) these
mechanisms are likely just the tip of the iceberg of gender
bias, and (2) not all connections shown by this experiment are
necessarily meaningful. Moreover, the differences detected by
microarray analysis may reflect both microbiota-induced
changes and changes induced by a different course of T1D
development.
Genetic experiments usually provide the most definitive
results. In the case where the microbiota is involved as an
epigenetic factor influencing disease development, carefully
controlled experiments are needed. Because the role of IFN-g
in the gender bias has been supported by simultaneous observation (at the same time and in the same facility) of the three genetically modified mouse strains relevant to IFN-g signaling with
mice carrying targeted mutations that did not support the gender
bias, it is very likely that IFN-g is central to at least one of the
protective mechanisms.
Furthermore, lymph nodes of male NOD mice produced more
IFN-g compared to female lymph nodes and also contained
more IFN-g producing T cells. How could excessive IFN-g be
involved in protection from T1D? One possibility is that this cytokine negatively regulates T helper cells required to activate B
cells, which are clearly needed for the development of T1D
(Serreze et al., 1998; Silveira et al., 2002). The other option is
that IFN-g works as a self-limiting factor inducing cell death in
activated T cells (Liu and Janeway, 1990), including in T1D (Qin
et al., 2004; Sobel et al., 2002).
It also appears that macrophages are already ‘‘imprinted’’ by
androgens in vivo and with the help of microbial signals stimulate
T cells to produce more IFN-g. The nature of imprinted cellular
signals is not yet known and warrants further investigation; however, our findings support the two-signal model of gender bias.
Several other genes showed multiple connections in the geneinteraction network However, the targeted deletion of Cd14
408 Immunity 39, 400–412, August 22, 2013 ª2013 Elsevier Inc.

(Klöting et al., 2004) and of tlr4 (Dong et al., 2012) have preserved
the gender bias, indicating that although CD14 was strongly expressed in SPF males, this enhancement was not meaningful.
The other cytokine revealed by gene-expression analysis was
IL-1b, also a proinflammatory cytokine. The role of IL-1b is still
unclear, because IL-1-receptor requires MyD88 for signaling,
whereas gender bias seems to be MyD88-independent. It is,
however, possible that several MyD88-dependent and -independent mechanisms controlled by hormones exist to support
the gender bias of autoimmunity. The involvement of Caspase-1
in gender bias (Schott et al., 2004) also points at the inflammasome involvement.
It remains to be determined whether the mechanisms that are
induced in a gender-biased manner can be used for treatment of
non-gender-biased diseases. This is especially important
because T1D in humans is not gender biased, although the disease itself is likely a constellation of diseases that needs to be
stratified to reveal the bias. Finally, it is essential to determine
whether gender bias in other autoimmune disorders is dependent on microbiota.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Mice
NOD/ShiLtJ (The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME) mice were kept under
SPF and GF conditions at The University of Chicago Animal Resource Center.
GF status was monitored by aerobic and anaerobic fecal cultures and PCR
amplification of bacterial 16S rRNA genes from fecal DNA as previously
described (Kane et al., 2011).
Gnotobiotic NOD mice were derived from GF mice by introduction of a specified bacterial community via gastric gavage to the parents in a separate
isolator. Bacteria were transferred to the progeny naturally from the mother,
and the efficiency of colonization of the progeny has been confirmed by
PCR for 16S rRNA genes specific for the colonizing lineages. VSL3 mix
containing Bifidobacterium breve, B. longum, B. infantis, Lactobacillus
acidophilus, L. plantarum, L. casei, L. bulgaricus, and Streptococcus thermophilus was a generous gift from Dr. Claudio De Simone (VSL Pharmaceuticals,
Inc, Gaithersburg, MD). ASF (Dewhirst et al., 1999) was obtained from Taconic
Farms (Hudson, NY). SFB were kept frozen as cecal contents obtained from
SFB monocolonized mice, defrosted, and used to colonize GF mice. SECS
bacterium was introduced to GF male and female mice at the time of weaning
by gavage of 100 mL of overnight cultures. Mice were housed under specificpathogen-free or germ-free conditions at The University of Chicago. All experiments were performed in accordance with the institutional and national
guidelines.
Surgery
Gonads were excised from 4-week-old males anesthetized with ketamine and
xylozine combination (100 mg/kg and 5 mg/kg, respectively) with the ChangeA-Tip handheld cauterizer (Bovie Medical Corporation, Clearwater, FL).
Mock-operated mice had an incision made followed by application of the
wound clips.
Diabetes
Diabetes development was monitored by weekly testing of urine glucose with
Diastix strips (Bayer, Elkhart, IN). At least 200 islets per group of animals were
scored with pancreatic sections cut at 40 mm intervals and graded as follows:
0, no visible infiltration; I, periinsulitis; II, insulitis (Wen et al., 2008).
Detection of IFN-g
Pancreatic lymph nodes (2–10 mg) homogenized in cold PBS with protease inhibitors (Roche, Indianapolis, IN), spun for 5 min at 10,000 rpm at 4 C, and
diluted to 0.4 mg of tissue/ml were assayed (50 ml per sample) with an IFN-g
ELISA kit (BD Biosciences, San Diego, CA).

Immunity
Hormones and Microbes Jointly Reduce Autoimmunity

Figure 6. Involvement of IFN-g in the Gender Bias of T1D
(A) Manipulation of sexual dimorphism of T1D in NOD mice by gene knockouts (Chatenoud et al., 2001; Serreze et al., 2001; Serreze et al., 2000) as reported by
T1DR or by an original paper for Casp1/ mice (Schott et al., 2004).
(B) IFN-g expression in the PLNs of males and females in GF, SPF, and SFB-monocolonized NOD mice. Mean cytokine concentration ± SEM. Tissues were
collected from 13-week-old mice, homogenized, and used for IFN-g-specific ELISA. The following abbreviation is used: c, SPF males castrated at 4 weeks of age.
(C) IFN-g-specific RNA expression in 12- to 13-week-old SPF males and females was compared by qRT- PCR. The following abbreviation is used: AU, arbitrary
units. Mean ± SEM.
(D) The percentage of IFN-g-positive cells among CD4+ and CD8+ T cells from the PLNs of male, female, and castrated male (c) NOD mice. Mean ± SEM.
(E) Peritoneal macrophages from female, male, and IFN-g-negative male mice were pretreated or not with heat-inactivated SECS bacteria overnight before
addition of G9C8 T cells and their cognate peptide. IFN-g was measured by ELISA in the supernatants after overnight culture. Data from a representative
experiment of three independent experiments. Mean ± SEM.
n represents mice per group. p values were determined by Student’s t test. See also Figure S4.

Immunity 39, 400–412, August 22, 2013 ª2013 Elsevier Inc. 409

Immunity
Hormones and Microbes Jointly Reduce Autoimmunity

RNA Isolation and Reverse Transcription-PCR (RT-PCR)
One microgram of total RNA recovered from pancreatic lymph nodes of
10-week-old mice by homogenizing samples in Trizol (Invitrogen, Carlsbad,
CA) was reverse transcribed with SuperScript III First-Strand kit (Invitrogen)
and Oligo-dT primers. SYBR Green (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) real-time PCR
was performed in 20 mL reactions with 2 mL of complementary DNA. The
following primers were used: GAPDH sense 50 -AACGACCCCTTCATTG
AC-30 , GAPDH antisense 50 -TCCACGACAT ACTCAGCAC-30 , IFN-g sense
50 -AACGCTACACACTGCATCT-30 , IFN-g antisense 50 -GAGCTCATTGAATGC
TTGG-30 . AB StepOnePlus system (Applied Biosystems, Foster City CA) and
StepOne software were used.
For IFN-g intracellular staining, lymph node and spleen cells were activated
in vitro with PMA and Ionomycin for 4 hr, permeabilized, and stained as
described (Kriegel et al., 2011).
Flow Cytometry Analysis
Lymph nodes and spleens from 10- to 13-week-old mice were manually disrupted and either used as suspensions or incubated with Collagenase (0.2 mg/mL)
(Type II, Invitrogen) and DNase (0.15 mg/mL) (Roche) for 30’ at 37 C and
passed through a nylon mesh to release macrophages. Cells were stained
with directly conjugated antibodies to TFRC-APC (Transferrin receptor), F4/
80-PerCP, and CD11b-PE or CD11b-PECy7 in combination with anti-CD206PE, CD4-PeCy7 (all from eBioscience, San Diego, CA) and CD8-Pacific Blue
(Biolegend, San Diego, CA). Anti-mouse IFN-g XMG1.5-APC antibodies were
from BD Biosciences. Cells were analyzed with a FACS Canto or LSR-II flowcytometers (BD Biosciences), and the data were analyzed with FlowJo software
(V. 9.6.1, Tree Star, Ashland, OR). For macrophage analysis, all gates were established such that 1%–2% of cells stained with isotype controls were positive
and dead cells were excluded by calcein blue staining (eBioscience).
T Cell Activation In Vitro
Peritoneal macrophages were isolated 4 days after intraperitoneal administration of 1.5 ml of thioglycolate (Difco Laboratories, Detroit MI). Macrophages
were plated in Click’s medium at a density of 5 3 104 cells per well of a 96
well flat-bottom plate, allowed to settle and attach, and washed with PBS to
remove nonadherent cells. Macrophages were stimulated for 18 hr with
heat-killed SECS at a ratio of approximately 1:25. Wells were washed
with Click’s medium prior to addition of 7.5 3 104 purified G9C8 T cells and
3 mg/ml of cognate peptide InsB15-23.
Testosterone Measurements
Serum testosterone concentrations were determined with a rat/mouse testosterone ELISA kit (IBL America, Minneapolis, MN).
Statistical Analysis
Statistical analysis of histology scoring, serum testosterone concentration,
and IFN-g concentration was performed with Prism 5 (GraphPad). Results
are expressed as means ± SEM. The statistical difference between two groups
was determined by Student’s t test. For multiple groups, the statistical difference was determined with one-way ANOVA. T1D incidence data was analyzed
by Kaplan-Meier with Prism 5 (GraphPad). A p value < 0.05 was considered
statistically significant.
SFB Quantitative PCR (qPCR) Comparison
Snap-frozen cecal content was placed in lysis buffer and transferred into
autoclaved cryotube containing 500 ml of 0.1 mm zirconium-silica beads
(Biospec Products, Bartlesville, OK) and 20% SDS (210 mL), bead beaten for
2 min with a Mini-Beadbeater (Biospec, Bartlesville, OK), followed by
phenol-chloroform extraction of DNA, as described (Turnbaugh et al., 2009).
SYBR Green real-time PCR was performed with a dilution of sample that
corresponded to 20 ng of original cecal content per well with SFB-specific
primers: SFB736 forward 50 -GACGCTGAGG CATGAG AGCAT-30 and
SFB884 reverse 50 -GACGGCACGGATTGTTATTCA-30 (Barman et al., 2008).
Cecum contents from GF mice served as negative controls.
Culturing and Classification of SECS
Fecal samples from NOD male mice from our colony were homogenized with
plastic pestles in 0.5% tergital 0.5% BSA PBS buffer followed by serial dilution

410 Immunity 39, 400–412, August 22, 2013 ª2013 Elsevier Inc.

and plating on LB and MacConkey agar, followed by incubation at 37 C for
20 hr. A single colony from a MacConkey plate was subcultured and frozen
stocks prepared in 10% Glycerol and stored at 80 C for long-term storage.
This clone was classified by colony PCR by amplification and sequencing of its
16S rDNA with universal bacterial primers 8F: 50 -AGAGTTTGATCCTGG
CTCAG-30 , and 1392R: 50 -ACGGGCGGTGTGTAC-30 . The bacterium was
classified using the Michigan State University Ribosomal Database Project
classifier function (http://rdp.cme.msu.edu/).
Gene-Expression Analysis
PLNs were isolated from 9- to 10-week-old GF and SPF male and female NOD
mice (three mice per group). RNA was extracted with guanidinium-cesium
chloride gradient ultracentrifugation (Chirgwin et al., 1979). RNA quality was
assessed with agarose gel electrophoresis and the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer
(Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto CA). Samples were analyzed with Illumina
MouseRef 8 BeadChip (Illumina, San Diego, CA) array at the Functional
Genomics Facility core at the University of Chicago.
Sets of genes with expression changes greater than 1 log-fold were identified with and without permutation testing. The combinatorial gene-selection
model identified a signature of 39 genes (gene set IV) regulated in a male-specific and germ-dependent manner, which were examined in the context of
known and predicted gene-gene interactions with the STRING database
(Szklarczyk et al., 2011) and identified a large connected subnetwork with
Il1b and Ifng serving as hubs based on the number of interacting gene
partners.
To determine cell-specific expression pattern by our gene signature, we
generated a gene-abundance profile by using a panel of 96 different cell types
and conditions available from the BioGPS murine RNA Gene Expression Atlas
(http://biogps.gnf.org) (Lattin et al., 2008; Wu et al., 2009). Microarray data
were deposited in GEO (Gene Expression Omnibus, http://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/geo/) database under accession number GSE49467.
Molecular Identification of Bacteria with 16S Sequencing
16S Sequencing of Samples from 4-, 10-, and 13-Week-Old Mice
Cecal contents of male and female mice were collected with sterile instruments into cryovials and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen until processing.
Samples were collected from three age groups of mice: prepubescent
newly-weaned 4-week-old mice, postpubescent 10-week-old mice, and
another group of 13-week-old mice.
DNA was extracted from cecal samples, and the V4 region of the 16S rRNA
gene was amplified and sequenced on a 454 Genome Sequencer FLX
Titanium platform (Roche Diagnostics and Beckman Coulter Genomics).
Sequencing was performed at Argonne National Laboratory and at Research
and Testing Laboratory (RTL), Lubbock, TX, as previously described (Dowd
et al., 2008). On average, 10,000 sequences per sample were acquired.
Libraries were separated by exact matches to barcode tags and deposited
to MG-RAST. The standard MG-RAST processing pipeline was used to
(1) remove artificial replicate sequences produced by sequencing artifacts,
(2) remove contaminant mouse sequences with DNA level matching to the
mouse genome, and (3) filter sequence reads based on length and on
the number of ambiguous base calls with default settings. Sequences
were deposited in Metagenomics Analysis Server (MG-RAST, http://
metagenomics.anl.gov) database under the following accession numbers:
mgp1501, mgp1470, mgp2995, and mgp4244.
The alpha diversity was calculated with the antilog of the Shannon diversity
index. The Shannon diversity index is an abundance-weighted average of the
logarithm of the relative abundances of annotated species. The species-level
annotations are from all the annotation source databases used by MG-RAST.
Statistical analysis was carried out with the MATLAB (version 7.12.0.635)
software package. The Mann-Whitney test was used to test whether two alpha
diversity distributions have equal medians against the alternative that they do
not have equal medians. Data is visualized by box plots. In each box, the central red line is the median (50th percentile), the (upper and lower) edges of the
box are the 75th and 25th percentiles, the error bars extend to the last datum
within 1.5 of the interquartile range of the upper and lower quartiles, and
outliers are plotted individually.
Family level PCA analysis and hierarchical clustering was performed in
MATLAB. The difference between proportions of reads mapped to specific

Immunity
Hormones and Microbes Jointly Reduce Autoimmunity

families in males and females was tested with a one-sided t test. We controlled
for multiple hypothesis testing with the q value method by adjusting the p value
to reflect the false discovery rate (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995; Storey,
2002).
Hierarchical clustering of 16S sequencing of cecal samples from 4-week-old
and 10-week-old male and female mice were performed with the Euclidean
distance metric and clustering by average linkage. We standardized the data
by calculating the median count of microbes at the family level for all samples
in a group. The hierarchical clustering analysis allowed us to visualize similarity
between pairwise comparisons of the four groups. The results are displayed in
a dendrogram, which shows the linkage points at increasing degree of
dissimilarity.

ACCESSION NUMBERS
Microarray data were deposited in GEO (Gene Expression Omnibus, http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) database under accession number GSE49467.
16S sequences were deposited in Metagenomics Analysis Server (MGRAST, http://metagenomics.anl.gov) database under the following accession
numbers: mgp1501, mgp1470, mgp2995, and mgp4244.

SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes five figures and can be found with this
article online at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2013.08.013.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Claudio De Simone for his help with VSL3, Anuradha Nadimpalli and
Sarah Owens for help with sequencing sample preparations, and Joseph
Pickard for editing the manuscript. A.V.C. is supported by National Institutes
of Health grant AI082418 and by the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation
grant 17-2011-519. A.V.C. and D.A. are supported by NIH/NIDDK Digestive
Disease Research Core Center grant DK42086. L.Y. and M.B. were supported
by Molecular and Cellular Biology training grant (T32 GM007183) and Clinical
Translational Science Award TL1 training grant (TL1TR000432), respectively.
A.A.K. is supported by NIH grant p50 GM081892 and the Chicago Biomedical
Consortium supported by Searle Funds at the Chicago Community Trust.
Received: January 27, 2013
Accepted: May 24, 2013
Published: August 22, 2013
REFERENCES
Barman, M., Unold, D., Shifley, K., Amir, E., Hung, K., Bos, N., and Salzman, N.
(2008). Enteric salmonellosis disrupts the microbial ecology of the murine
gastrointestinal tract. Infect. Immun. 76, 907–915.
Bartke, A., Steele, R.E., Musto, N., and Caldwell, B.V. (1973). Fluctuations in
plasma testosterone levels in adult male rats and mice. Endocrinology 92,
1223–1228.
Becker, L., Liu, N.C., Averill, M.M., Yuan, W., Pamir, N., Peng, Y., Irwin, A.D.,
Fu, X., Bornfeldt, K.E., and Heinecke, J.W. (2012). Unique proteomic signatures distinguish macrophages and dendritic cells. PLoS ONE 7, e33297.
Benjamini, Y., and Hochberg, Y. (1995). Controlling the false discovery rate: A
practical and powerful approach to multiple testing. Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society 57, 289–300.
Calcinaro, F., Dionisi, S., Marinaro, M., Candeloro, P., Bonato, V., Marzotti, S.,
Corneli, R.B., Ferretti, E., Gulino, A., Grasso, F., et al. (2005). Oral probiotic
administration induces interleukin-10 production and prevents spontaneous
autoimmune diabetes in the non-obese diabetic mouse. Diabetologia 48,
1565–1575.
Chatenoud, L., Salomon, B., and Bluestone, J.A. (2001). Suppressor T cells—
they’re back and critical for regulation of autoimmunity! Immunol. Rev. 182,
149–163.

Chirgwin, J.M., Przybyla, A.E., MacDonald, R.J., and Rutter, W.J. (1979).
Isolation of biologically active ribonucleic acid from sources enriched in ribonuclease. Biochemistry 18, 5294–5299.
Dewhirst, F.E., Chien, C.C., Paster, B.J., Ericson, R.L., Orcutt, R.P., Schauer,
D.B., and Fox, J.G. (1999). Phylogeny of the defined murine microbiota: altered
Schaedler flora. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 65, 3287–3292.
Dong, B., Qi, D., Yang, L., Huang, Y., Xiao, X., Tai, N., Wen, L., and Wong, F.S.
(2012). TLR4 regulates cardiac lipid accumulation and diabetic heart disease in
the nonobese diabetic mouse model of type 1 diabetes. Am. J. Physiol. Heart
Circ. Physiol. 303, H732–H742.
Dowd, S.E., Wolcott, R.D., Sun, Y., McKeehan, T., Smith, E., and Rhoads, D.
(2008). Polymicrobial nature of chronic diabetic foot ulcer biofilm infections
determined using bacterial tag encoded FLX amplicon pyrosequencing
(bTEFAP). PLoS ONE 3, e3326.
Fish, E.N. (2008). The X-files in immunity: sex-based differences predispose
immune responses. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 8, 737–744.
Fitzpatrick, F., Lepault, F., Homo-Delarche, F., Bach, J.F., and Dardenne, M.
(1991). Influence of castration, alone or combined with thymectomy, on the
development of diabetes in the nonobese diabetic mouse. Endocrinology
129, 1382–1390.
Fox, H.S. (1992). Androgen treatment prevents diabetes in nonobese diabetic
mice. J. Exp. Med. 175, 1409–1412.
Gaboriau-Routhiau, V., Rakotobe, S., Lécuyer, E., Mulder, I., Lan, A.,
Bridonneau, C., Rochet, V., Pisi, A., De Paepe, M., Brandi, G., et al. (2009).
The key role of segmented filamentous bacteria in the coordinated maturation
of gut helper T cell responses. Immunity 31, 677–689.
Gagnerault, M.C., Luan, J.J., Lotton, C., and Lepault, F. (2002). Pancreatic
lymph nodes are required for priming of beta cell reactive T cells in NOD
mice. J. Exp. Med. 196, 369–377.
Gordon, S., and Martinez, F.O. (2010). Alternative activation of macrophages:
mechanism and functions. Immunity 32, 593–604.
Gordon, S., and Taylor, P.R. (2005). Monocyte and macrophage heterogeneity. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 5, 953–964.
Höglund, P., Mintern, J., Waltzinger, C., Heath, W., Benoist, C., and Mathis, D.
(1999). Initiation of autoimmune diabetes by developmentally regulated presentation of islet cell antigens in the pancreatic lymph nodes. J. Exp. Med.
189, 331–339.
Ivanov, I.I., Atarashi, K., Manel, N., Brodie, E.L., Shima, T., Karaoz, U., Wei, D.,
Goldfarb, K.C., Santee, C.A., Lynch, S.V., et al. (2009). Induction of intestinal
Th17 cells by segmented filamentous bacteria. Cell 139, 485–498.
Johnston, L.K., Rims, C.R., Gill, S.E., McGuire, J.K., and Manicone, A.M.
(2012). Pulmonary macrophage subpopulations in the induction and resolution
of acute lung injury. Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol. 47, 417–426.
Kanda, N., Tsuchida, T., and Tamaki, K. (1997). Testosterone suppresses antiDNA antibody production in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from patients
with systemic lupus erythematosus. Arthritis Rheum. 40, 1703–1711.
Kane, M., Case, L.K., Kopaskie, K., Kozlova, A., MacDearmid, C., Chervonsky,
A.V., and Golovkina, T.V. (2011). Successful transmission of a retrovirus
depends on the commensal microbiota. Science 334, 245–249.
Klöting, N., Klöting, I., and Jack, R.S. (2004). CD14 triggers autoimmune Type
1 diabetes in the NOD mouse. Diabetologia 47, 151–152.
Kovats, S., and Carreras, E. (2008). Regulation of dendritic cell differentiation
and function by estrogen receptor ligands. Cell. Immunol. 252, 81–90.
Kriegel, M.A., Sefik, E., Hill, J.A., Wu, H.J., Benoist, C., and Mathis, D. (2011).
Naturally transmitted segmented filamentous bacteria segregate with diabetes
protection in nonobese diabetic mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108, 11548–
11553.
Lattin, J.E., Schroder, K., Su, A.I., Walker, J.R., Zhang, J., Wiltshire, T., Saijo,
K., Glass, C.K., Hume, D.A., Kellie, S., and Sweet, M.J. (2008). Expression
analysis of G Protein-Coupled Receptors in mouse macrophages.
Immunome Res. 4, 5.
Liu, Y., and Janeway, C.A., Jr. (1990). Interferon gamma plays a critical role in
induced cell death of effector T cell: a possible third mechanism of selftolerance. J. Exp. Med. 172, 1735–1739.

Immunity 39, 400–412, August 22, 2013 ª2013 Elsevier Inc. 411

Immunity
Hormones and Microbes Jointly Reduce Autoimmunity

Loke, P., Nair, M.G., Parkinson, J., Guiliano, D., Blaxter, M., and Allen, J.E.
(2002). IL-4 dependent alternatively-activated macrophages have a distinctive
in vivo gene expression phenotype. BMC Immunol. 3, 7.
Makino, S., Kunimoto, K., Muraoka, Y., and Katagiri, K. (1981). Effect of castration on the appearance of diabetes in NOD mouse. Jikken Dobutsu 30,
137–140.
Markle, J.G., Frank, D.N., Mortin-Toth, S., Robertson, C.E., Feazel, L.M.,
Rolle-Kampczyk, U., von Bergen, M., McCoy, K.D., Macpherson, A.J., and
Danska, J.S. (2013). Sex differences in the gut microbiome drive hormonedependent regulation of autoimmunity. Science 339, 1084–1088.
Mathis, D., and Benoist, C. (2012). The influence of the microbiota on type-1
diabetes: on the threshold of a leap forward in our understanding. Immunol.
Rev. 245, 239–249.
Pozzilli, P., Signore, A., Williams, A.J., and Beales, P.E. (1993). NOD mouse
colonies around the world—recent facts and figures. Immunol. Today 14,
193–196.
Qin, H.Y., Chaturvedi, P., and Singh, B. (2004). In vivo apoptosis of diabetogenic T cells in NOD mice by IFN-gamma/TNF-alpha. Int. Immunol. 16,
1723–1732.
Raes, G., De Baetselier, P., Noël, W., Beschin, A., Brombacher, F., and
Hassanzadeh Gh, G. (2002). Differential expression of FIZZ1 and Ym1 in alternatively versus classically activated macrophages. J. Leukoc. Biol. 71,
597–602.
Roubinian, J.R., Talal, N., Greenspan, J.S., Goodman, J.R., and Siiteri, P.K.
(1978). Effect of castration and sex hormone treatment on survival, anti-nucleic
acid antibodies, and glomerulonephritis in NZB/NZW F1 mice. J. Exp. Med.
147, 1568–1583.
Schott, W.H., Haskell, B.D., Tse, H.M., Milton, M.J., Piganelli, J.D., ChoisyRossi, C.M., Reifsnyder, P.C., Chervonsky, A.V., and Leiter, E.H. (2004).
Caspase-1 is not required for type 1 diabetes in the NOD mouse. Diabetes
53, 99–104.

diabetic mice: sometimes an outcome, rather than the cause, of diabetes
resistance elicited by immunostimulation. J. Immunol. 166, 1352–1359.
Silveira, P.A., Johnson, E., Chapman, H.D., Bui, T., Tisch, R.M., and Serreze,
D.V. (2002). The preferential ability of B lymphocytes to act as diabetogenic
APC in NOD mice depends on expression of self-antigen-specific immunoglobulin receptors. Eur. J. Immunol. 32, 3657–3666.
Snyder, D.L., and Wostmann, B.S. (1985). Comparison of blood chemistry and
hormone levels from conventional and germfree rats. Prog. Clin. Biol. Res. 181,
95–98.
Sobel, D.O., Han, J., Williams, J., Yoon, J.W., Jun, H.S., and Ahvazi, B. (2002).
Gamma interferon paradoxically inhibits the development of diabetes in the
NOD mouse. J. Autoimmun. 19, 129–137.
Stein, M., Keshav, S., Harris, N., and Gordon, S. (1992). Interleukin 4 potently
enhances murine macrophage mannose receptor activity: a marker of alternative immunologic macrophage activation. J. Exp. Med. 176, 287–292.
Storey, J.D. (2002). A direct approach to false discovery rates. J. R. Stat. Soc.
Ser. A Stat. Soc. 64, 479–498.
Szklarczyk, D., Franceschini, A., Kuhn, M., Simonovic, M., Roth, A., Minguez,
P., Doerks, T., Stark, M., Muller, J., Bork, P., et al. (2011). The STRING database in 2011: functional interaction networks of proteins, globally integrated
and scored. Nucleic Acids Res. 39(Database issue), D561–D568.
Turley, S.J., Lee, J.W., Dutton-Swain, N., Mathis, D., and Benoist, C. (2005).
Endocrine self and gut non-self intersect in the pancreatic lymph nodes.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102, 17729–17733.
Turnbaugh, P.J., Hamady, M., Yatsunenko, T., Cantarel, B.L., Duncan, A., Ley,
R.E., Sogin, M.L., Jones, W.J., Roe, B.A., Affourtit, J.P., et al. (2009). A core gut
microbiome in obese and lean twins. Nature 457, 480–484.
Varanasi, V., Avanesyan, L., Schumann, D.M., and Chervonsky, A.V. (2012).
Cytotoxic mechanisms employed by mouse T cells to destroy pancreatic
b-cells. Diabetes 61, 2862–2870.

Serreze, D.V., Fleming, S.A., Chapman, H.D., Richard, S.D., Leiter, E.H., and
Tisch, R.M. (1998). B lymphocytes are critical antigen-presenting cells for
the initiation of T cell-mediated autoimmune diabetes in nonobese diabetic
mice. J. Immunol. 161, 3912–3918.

Wen, L., Ley, R.E., Volchkov, P.Y., Stranges, P.B., Avanesyan, L.,
Stonebraker, A.C., Hu, C., Wong, F.S., Szot, G.L., Bluestone, J.A., et al.
(2008). Innate immunity and intestinal microbiota in the development of Type
1 diabetes. Nature 455, 1109–1113.

Serreze, D.V., Post, C.M., Chapman, H.D., Johnson, E.A., Lu, B., and
Rothman, P.B. (2000). Interferon-gamma receptor signaling is dispensable in
the development of autoimmune type 1 diabetes in NOD mice. Diabetes 49,
2007–2011.

Whitacre, C.C. (2001). Sex differences in autoimmune disease. Nat. Immunol.
2, 777–780.

Serreze, D.V., Chapman, H.D., Post, C.M., Johnson, E.A., Suarez-Pinzon,
W.L., and Rabinovitch, A. (2001). Th1 to Th2 cytokine shifts in nonobese

412 Immunity 39, 400–412, August 22, 2013 ª2013 Elsevier Inc.

Wu, C., Orozco, C., Boyer, J., Leglise, M., Goodale, J., Batalov, S., Hodge,
C.L., Haase, J., Janes, J., Huss, J.W., 3rd, and Su, A.I. (2009). BioGPS: an
extensible and customizable portal for querying and organizing gene annotation resources. Genome Biol. 10, R130.

