See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/11939363

Gender bias in the diagnosis of COPD
Article in Chest · June 2001
DOI: 10.1378/chest.119.6.1691 · Source: PubMed

CITATIONS

READS

341

1,690

3 authors, including:
Kenneth R Chapman

Julia Pye

University of Toronto

Edge Hill University

523 PUBLICATIONS 18,209 CITATIONS

373 PUBLICATIONS 13,955 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

Zemaira/Respreeza research View project

All content following this page was uploaded by Kenneth R Chapman on 30 November 2015.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

SEE PROFILE

Gender Bias in the Diagnosis of COPD*
Kenneth R. Chapman, MD, FCCP; Donald P. Tashkin, MD, FCCP; and
David J. Pye, PhD

Background: COPD is thought to be more prevalent among men than women, a finding usually
attributed to higher smoking rates and more frequent occupational exposures of significance for
men. However, smoking prevalence has increased among women and there is evidence that
women may be more susceptible to the adverse pulmonary function effects of smoking than men.
There may also be underdiagnosis and misdiagnosis of COPD in both sexes because objective
measures of lung function are underused.
Objectives: We undertook the present study to determine if there is gender bias in the diagnosis
of COPD, such that women are less likely than men to receive a diagnosis of COPD. We also
attempted to determine if underuse of lung function measurements was a factor in any bias
detected.
Methods: We surveyed a random sample of 192 primary-care physicians (96 American and 96
Canadian; 154 men and 38 women) using a hypothetical case presentation and a structured
interview. The case of cough and dyspnea in a smoker was presented in six versions differing only
in the age and sex of the patient. After presentation of the history and physical findings,
physicians were asked to state the most probable diagnosis and to choose the diagnostic studies
needed. Physicians were then presented with spirometric findings of moderate or severe
obstruction without significant bronchodilator response, and the questions repeated. Finally, the
negative outcome of an oral steroid trial was described.
Results: Initially, COPD was given as the most probable diagnosis significantly more often for
men than women (58% vs 42%; p < 0.05). The likelihood of a COPD diagnosis increased
significantly and initial differences between sexes decreased as objective information was
provided. After spirometry, COPD diagnosis rates for men and women were 74% vs 66% (p ⴝ not
significant); after the steroid trial 85% vs 79% (p ⴝ not significant). Only 22% of physicians would
have requested spirometry after the initial presentation.
Conclusions: In North America, primary-care physicians underdiagnose COPD, particularly in
women. Spirometry reduces the risk of underdiagnosis and gender bias but is underused.
(CHEST 2001; 119:1691–1695)
Key words: asthma; misdiagnosis; physician decision making; spirometry; underdiagnosis

fourth most common cause of death
C inOPDNorthis theAmerica
and remains the only common
cause of mortality that is increasing in prevalence.
Despite an overall decline in the prevalence of
cigarette smoking since the pivotal report of the
Surgeon General in the mid-1960s, we continue to
*From the Division of Respiratory Medicine (Dr. Chapman),
Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; UCLA School of Medicine (Dr. Tashkin), Los
Angeles, CA; and Westmount Research Consultants (Dr. Pye),
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
The authors received a research grant-in-aid from Boehringer
Ingelheim Canada Ltd and Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals Inc.
Manuscript received April 12, 2000; revision accepted January 3,
2001.
Correspondence to: Kenneth R. Chapman, MD, FCCP, Asthma
Center of the University Health Network, Suite 4 – 011 ECW,
399 Bathurst St, Toronto, Ontario M5T 2S8, Canada; e-mail:
kchapman@inforamp.net

witness the late pulmonary sequelae of tobacco
consumption. Diagnosed COPD appears to be more
prevalent in men than women, whether expressed in
terms of mortality or hospital separation data. This is
usually attributed to the historically higher rates of
cigarette smoking among men and their greater
likelihood of exposure to significant occupational
respiratory irritants. However, these risk factors have
shifted dramatically in the past several decades.
Cigarette smoking is now as common or more common among women as compared to men, and more
women than before now work outside the home in
occupations once held almost exclusively by men.
There is also growing evidence that women may be
more susceptible to the adverse pulmonary consequences of tobacco smoking. In the Lung Health
Study1 of mild COPD, the prevalence of a positive
methacholine challenge finding was 25% among men
CHEST / 119 / 6 / JUNE, 2001

Downloaded From: http://journal.publications.chestnet.org/ by University Health Network, Kenneth Chapman on 11/29/2015

1691

but 48% among women. In two Danish population
studies2 of 13,897 subjects followed for between 7
and 16 years, women who smoked had a higher rate
of lung function decline per amount smoked than
men and were at greater risk of being hospitalized
for the treatment of COPD.
Although women are clearly at increasing risk of
developing COPD, the diagnosis continues to be
made much more commonly in men. By contrast, in
studies3 of emergency department and ambulatory
clinic care of asthma, women present with doctordiagnosed asthma more often than men. Such findings could be explained by a gender bias among
physicians in their diagnosis of different types of
respiratory diseases. This has been well documented
for other tobacco-related illnesses such as coronary
artery disease.
It is plausible that misdiagnosis, including possible
gender bias, could be reduced by the appropriate use
of objective laboratory studies. Unfortunately, previous studies4 have shown that physicians make little
use of spirometry in their investigation of chronic
respiratory symptoms. We therefore undertook the
following study to determine if North American
physicians reached similar provisional diagnoses for
hypothetical male and female patients presenting
with identical chronic respiratory symptoms and
identical smoking histories. We also sought to examine test-ordering behavior by physicians presented
with these clinical scenarios, as well as the impact on
their diagnoses when objective pulmonary function
data were provided to them.
Materials and Methods
Study Design
We devised one hypothetical case summary to present to
primary-care physicians for their review and management. The
summary described a middle-aged former smoker (of approximately 40 pack-years consumption) who presented with morning
cough persisting for 4 years and worsening intermittently following viral respiratory tract infections. For 3 years, the patient had
been troubled by breathlessness on moderate exertion. On
physical examination, the only abnormal finding was the presence
of expiratory wheezes throughout the chest. In randomized
fashion, half the physicians were told that the patient was a
woman, and half were told that the patient was a man. Also in
random fashion, the age of the patient was given as 47 years or 59
years in balanced fashion between the sexes. Using a structured
questionnaire, trained interviewers who were blinded to the
major objectives of the study asked physicians to state the most
likely diagnosis and the diagnostic studies needed. Independent
of the provisional diagnosis offered or the tests requested, all
physicians were provided with a set of laboratory test results for
the hypothetical patient. These comprised normal “routine”
blood analyses (hemoglobin, WBC count, sedimentation rate,
electrolytes, liver enzymes, BUN, and creatinine), a normal ECG
finding, and a normal chest radiograph finding. In addition, an

abnormal spirometric result was reported. In balanced randomized fashion, physicians were shown one of two sets of numerical
spirometric data (FVC, FEV1, and FEV1/FVC) accompanied by
interpretations characterizing the results as a “moderate” or
“severe” obstructive defect. These corresponded with values of
FEV1 of 52% or 32% of predicted, respectively, and with values
of FEV1/FVC of 43% and 27%, respectively. Half the respondents also received postbronchodilator numerical results characterized as showing “minimal” change. Once again, physicians
were asked to offer their most probable diagnosis. After this was
given, physicians were provided with negative oral steroid trial
results for the hypothetical patient. That is, the patient was
described as using prednisone, 40 mg/d, for 2 weeks with no
significant change in FEV1. After this information had been
given, physicians were asked for the last time to provide a
diagnosis.
The diagnostic and test ordering terminology used by physicians was categorized by an a priori scheme. Terms not accounted for by the a priori scheme were categorized by two of
the investigators blinded to the gender, age, and degree of
obstruction that had elicited the response.
Physicians Surveyed
Before the survey instrument was used for the main physician
sample, we tested its plausibility, clarity, and consistency on a
convenience sample of 21 primary-care and respiratory specialist
physicians from two Canadian cities and two US cities. With
minor changes in terminology, the instrument was then administered to a sample of 96 US primary-care physicians and 96
Canadian primary-care physicians selected in random fashion
from two commercial databases of practicing physicians. In each
country, physician sampling was from seven geographic regions
ranging from coast to coast.
Data Analysis
An analysis of variance model was used to assess the influence
of patient gender and patient age on the frequency of COPD
diagnoses offered by physicians following presentation of the
history and physical examination results. A repeated-measures
analysis of variance model was used to assess the influence of
these and additional factors on the frequency of COPD diagnoses
over the three stages of the interview as additional data were
offered. These additional factors were severity of obstruction,
availability of bronchodilator test results, and nationality of the
responding physician. Proportions of tests ordered by US and
Canadian physicians were compared by ␹2 test. Results were
considered significant at the p ⬍ 0.05 level.

Results
Physicians Surveyed
We surveyed a random sample of 192 primarycare physicians (96 American and 96 Canadian; 154
men and 38 women). In the United States, interviews were conducted in the following geographic
areas (major urban center and surrounding nonurban region): Chicago, San Francisco, Seattle, Houston, Denver, Long Island, and Atlanta. In Canada,
interviews were conducted in the following geographic areas (major urban center and surrounding

1692

Downloaded From: http://journal.publications.chestnet.org/ by University Health Network, Kenneth Chapman on 11/29/2015

Clinical Investigations

nonurban region): Toronto, Montreal, Vancouver,
Calgary, Winnipeg, London, and Quebec City. For
each physician who participated in the survey, three
who were contacted did not. The most common
reason given for nonparticipation was inability to
schedule an appointment with the interviewer during the few days available for survey participation in
each city. Rates of participation were similar between Canada and the United States.
Diagnoses
Only 57% of physicians offered COPD as the most
likely diagnosis following presentation of the history
and physical examination. As shown in Table 1,
COPD was significantly more likely to be offered as
the provisional diagnosis for the hypothetical male
patient than the hypothetical female patient (64.6%
vs 49.0%; p ⬍ 0.05). Patient age was not significantly
related to the diagnosis offered. The likelihood of a
provisional COPD diagnosis increased significantly
(to 70%) after presentation of abnormal spirometric
findings (p ⬍ 0.001) and the disparity between male
and female patients decreased. There was a further
increase in the number of COPD diagnoses offered
by physicians after presentation of the negative oral
steroid trial results (p ⬍ 0.001). The disparity in
diagnosis between hypothetical male and female
patients decreased further. The most common alternative diagnosis was asthma, a provisional diagnosis
offered 35% of the time after the initial presentation,
27% of the time after abnormal spirometric results
were offered, and 14% of the time after a negative
oral steroid trial was described. Although the availability of spirometric data caused a significant increase in the frequency of COPD diagnoses for both
sexes, we could detect no effect on diagnoses offered
by the severity of obstruction or the availability of
negative bronchodilator response data.
At all three stages of management of the hypothetical patient, asthma was a significantly more common
alternative diagnosis for the female patient than the
male patient (Table 1). Approximately 8% of physicians offered alternative nonrespiratory diagnoses,
primarily cardiovascular disease, and the frequency
of such diagnoses was unchanged by the presentation

of spirometric and oral steroid trial data. We could
detect no significant effect of physician nationality or
gender on diagnosis.
Diagnostic Studies Requested
After the initial presentation of the hypothetical
patient, the most commonly requested study was a
chest radiograph; this was requested by approximately 80% of both American and Canadian physicians (Table 2). Other diagnostic studies were requested far less frequently as listed in Table 2. In
particular, only 21.8% of physicians requested spirometry, a test requested slightly more frequently by
American physicians than Canadian physicians
(p ⬍ 0.05). American physicians also ordered blood
analyses, ECGs, and arterial blood gas measurements more frequently than their Canadian counterparts. A small number of requests for methacholine
challenge tests came only from Canadian practitioners. There were no significant differences between
men and women physicians in their test-ordering
behavior.

Discussion
Our data show that many primary-care physicians
in North America are reluctant to consider the
diagnosis of COPD, even when confronted by a
middle-aged former smoker with chronic cough,
dyspnea, and wheezes on physical examination.
Moreover, they are less likely to make the diagnosis
of COPD in women than in men, a diagnostic bias
that is eliminated by the presentation of compatible
spirometric data. Regrettably, only a minority of
primary-care physicians would consider requesting
spirometry in their investigation of the dyspneic
patient with wheezes and a substantial smoking
history.
Ours is not the first study to document a physician
bias toward diagnosing tobacco-related diseases
more readily in men as compared to women. Women
who suffer chest pain are less likely than men to be
referred for invasive testing such as angiography,
implying a bias against the diagnosis of coronary

Table 1—Percentage of Diagnoses Offered at Each Stage of the Survey Process
History and Physical

Spirometry

Oral Steroid Trial

Diagnosis

Male

Female

Male

Female

Male

Female

COPD
Asthma
Other, nonrespiratory

64.6
32.3
3.1

49.0
43.8
7.3

76.0
21.9
2.1

64.6
32.3
3.1

85.4
10.4
4.2

78.1
17.7
4.2

CHEST / 119 / 6 / JUNE, 2001

Downloaded From: http://journal.publications.chestnet.org/ by University Health Network, Kenneth Chapman on 11/29/2015

1693

Table 2—Diagnostic Studies Requested After the Initial Presentation of the Patient*
Location

Chest
Radiograph

Blood
Analysis

ECG

Spirometry

Sputum
Culture

ABG
Analysis

Methacholine
Challenge

United States
Canada
Total

76.7
79.5
78.2

40.7†
27.3†
33.9

29.1†
17.0†
23.0

31.4†
12.5†
21.8

15.1
14.8
14.9

9.3†
3.4†
6.3

0†
5.7†
2.9

*Data are presented as percentage of physicians requesting study. ABG ⫽ arterial blood gas.
†p ⬍ 0.05.

artery disease in women or a bias toward the diagnosis in men.5 Various explanations have been offered for the differences in diagnostic rates between
men and women in certain disease settings. For
example, it has been suggested that men and women
may perceive or report some symptoms differently.6
It is also been noted that men and women use the
health-care system differently.7 Women use primarycare services more frequently than men and receive
more health-care services even when reproductiverelated care is excluded.8 Curiously, women are less
likely to receive specialist referrals than men.8 However, our study does not support these hypotheses,
given that gender bias was present in the absence of
specific patient behavior or perceptions. The details
presented in our hypothetical scenario were identical
for male and female patients. Thus, our findings
reflect a preexisting physician bias that is not related
to differences in patient personality, communication
skills, or expressed preferences.
Some might argue that such a bias in a tobaccorelated disease is appropriate. That is, they would
argue that the risk of COPD is truly higher in men
then in women given the historically higher tobacco
consumption rates in men. However, we believe that
this argument is flawed in several ways. First, the
argument is a tautology. That is, epidemiologic data
comparing the prevalence of various diseases by sex
and age are dependent on accurate physician diagnosis. There is no single and clearly defined laboratory test for COPD or asthma, and currently published diagnostic criteria are confusing and vague
with overlapping features between the syndromes.9,10 Thus, to argue that men have COPD
more commonly than women is indeed circular given
the findings of the present study. Second, a slightly
higher prevalence of a given disease is irrelevant in
the diagnostic approach to individual patients. Even
if COPD were somewhat more common in men than
women, a physician would be unwise to dismiss the
possibility of COPD in any woman suffering from
exertional breathlessness and wheezing against a
background of tobacco consumption.
Our study confirms our earlier report that spirometry is underused by primary-care physicians in

North America.4 We have previously surveyed primary-care physicians in Canada, presenting them
with a hypothetical scenario similar to the one used
in the present study. We discovered that only 5% of
Canadian physicians would request spirometry when
presented with a middle-aged smoker who suffered
from recurrent productive cough over 2 consecutive
years and presented with expiratory wheezes on
physical examination. In our earlier study, physicians
increased their requests for spirometry if they were
presented with the diagnostic term chronic bronchitis as part of the medical history. However, even with
this prompting, the rate of requesting spirometry was
⬍ 40%. We note that spirometry and objective measures of lung function are also poorly utilized in the
assessment of asthma. We have previously described
the clinical characteristics of patients referred for
methacholine challenge testing and found to have
negative studies.11 The majority of patients had
received a diagnosis of asthma by their primary-care
physicians and had endured treatment with an average of two or more antiasthma medications for ⬎ 2
years. Thus, the provisional diagnosis of airways
disease is anything but temporary. It may sometimes
lead to prolonged periods of inappropriate therapy.
Our study also reveals that there is considerable
diagnostic confusion between COPD and asthma,
the most common alternative diagnosis offered by
physicians. We find it significant that the initial ratio
of men (58%) to women (42%) accorded the diagnosis of COPD is almost the mirror image of the
gender ratio for asthma in a variety of studies of
emergency or ambulatory care.3,12 Some might argue
that the phenomenon of diagnostic exchange between the sexes is trivial and might note that in our
study the diagnosis of an obstructive lung disease
(regardless of subtype) was similar between the
sexes. However, this diagnostic imprecision ignores
the marked and diverging differences in prognosis
and therapy between asthma and COPD. Of particular concern to postmenopausal women incorrectly
labeled as having asthma would be the increased
likelihood of corticosteroid treatment. Several studies13,14 now report an increased likelihood of de-

1694

Downloaded From: http://journal.publications.chestnet.org/ by University Health Network, Kenneth Chapman on 11/29/2015

Clinical Investigations

creased bone density as a dose-related consequence
of inhaled corticosteroid exposure.
It is disturbing to note that some physicians in our
survey were remarkably reluctant to use the diagnostic term COPD or equivalent. Even after the description of persistent and unchanging obstruction following 2 weeks of oral steroid therapy, one in seven
physicians would continue to use the diagnostic label
asthma. This could help to explain our reported
findings from other surveys of respiratory disease
management. We have found that physicians often
prescribe similarly for asthma and COPD patients
despite distinguishing in a theoretical sense between
the illnesses.4,15 It is also possible that some physicians have chosen not to use the diagnostic terms
COPD or emphysema, as the former has little meaning for patients and the latter may be alarming to
patients. They may prefer the term asthma themselves, regarding it as a disease more amenable to
therapy and more rewarding to treat than COPD.
We have no explanation for the responses of 4% of
the physicians who continued to offer nonrespiratory
diagnoses as the most likely explanation for dyspnea
after presentation spirometric data showed moderate
or severe airflow limitation unresponsive to treatment with bronchodilators or steroids.
Some limitations to our study must be noted. First,
we did not test the actual practice behavior of
physicians we surveyed, behavior that might differ
somewhat from the responses recorded following the
presentation of written materials. Nevertheless, our
findings are consistent with published epidemiologic
and clinical trial data and we believe they are a
reasonable reflection of actual practice. Second, we
did not attempt to determine the reasons for the
provisional diagnoses offered; therefore, we have no
explanation for the underdiagnosis, gender bias, and
lack of pulmonary function testing seen. Further
research is needed to determine the factors responsible for the behaviors observed if appropriate corrective steps such as physician education are to be
taken. Third, we cannot identify which types of
physician practice or training backgrounds are associated with a neglect of objective spirometric testing
or with gender bias in the diagnosis of obstructive
lung disease. We sought by our screening process to
identify self-described “family doctors” in active
practice and read a descriptive statement to each
potential participant. It is possible that a small

number of primary-care internists participated in the
study in the United States but too few to allow
meaningful comparison to the remaining primarycare physicians.
References
1 Kanner RE, Connett JE, Altose MD, et al. Gender difference
in airway hyperresponsiveness in smokers with mild COPD:
the Lung Health Study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1994;
150:956 –961
2 Prescott E, Bjerg AM, Andersen PK, et al. Gender difference
in smoking effects on lung function and risk of hospitalization
for COPD: results from a Danish longitudinal study. Eur
Respir J 1997; 10:822– 827
3 Rea HH, Garrett JE, Mulder J, et al. Emergency room care
of asthmatics: a comparison between Auckland and Toronto.
Ann Allergy 1991; 66:48 –52
4 Kesten S, Chapman KR. Physician perceptions and management of COPD. Chest 1993; 104:254 –258
5 Ayanian JZ, Epstein AM. Differences in the use of procedures between women and men hospitalized for coronary
heart disease. N Engl J Med 1991; 325:221–225
6 Kühni CE, Sennhauser FH. The Yentl syndrome in childhood
asthma: risk factors for undertreatment in Swiss children.
Pediatr Pulmonol 1995; 19:156 –160
7 Hall JA, Roter DL, Katz NR. Meta-analysis of correlates of
provider behavior in medical encounters. Med Care 1988;
26:657– 675
8 Franks P, Clancy CM, Naumburg EH. Sex, access and excess.
Ann Intern Med 1995; 123:548 –550
9 Celli BR, Snider GL, Heffner J, et al. Standards for the
diagnosis and care of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1995; 152:S77–
S121
10 Sheffer AL, Bousquet J, Busse WW, et al. International
consensus report on diagnosis and management of asthma.
Bethesda, MD: US Department of Health and Human
Services, 1992; publication No. 92–3091
11 Joyce DP, Chapman KR, Kesten S. Prior diagnosis and
treatment of patients with normal results of methacholine
challenge and unexplained respiratory symptoms. Chest 1996;
109:697–701
12 Jackevicius C, Joyce DP, Kesten S, et al. Prehospitalization
inhaled corticosteroid use in patients with COPD or asthma.
Chest 1997; 111:296 –302
13 Hanania NA, Chapman KR, Sturtridge WC, et al. Doserelated decrease in bone density among asthmatic patients
treated with inhaled corticosteroids. J Allergy Clin Immunol
1995; 96:571–579
14 Ip M, Lam K, Yam L, et al. Decreased bone mineral density
in premenopausal asthma patients receiving long-term inhaled steroids. Chest 1994; 105:1722–1727
15 Jackevicius CA, Chapman KR. Prevalence of inhaled corticosteroid use among patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a survey. Ann Pharmacother 1997; 31:160 –164

CHEST / 119 / 6 / JUNE, 2001

publicationhttp://journal.publications.chestnet.org/
stats
DownloadedViewFrom:
by University Health Network, Kenneth Chapman on 11/29/2015

1695

