COLLOQUY

THE QUESTION

RESPONSES

BACKGROUND

Search The Site
Go
More options

|

Back issues

MIT and Gender Bias: Following Up on Victory
By NANCY HOPKINS

Home
News
Today's news
Current issue
Special issues & data
The Faculty
Research & Books
Government & Politics
Money & Management
Information Technology
Students
Athletics

In March, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology released a
document called "A Study on the Status of Women Faculty in
Science at MIT," which reported on gender discrimination against
female faculty members in its
School of Science. The process that
ALSO SEE:
produced the report began five
Join the debate: How pervasive years ago, when some of the 15
tenured female faculty members in
is bias against female faculty
members?
science -- of whom I was one -(The responses)
started to collect evidence that their
male peers had received a
disproportionate share of
laboratory space and resources for research.

International
Community Colleges
Short Subjects
Corrections

Opinion & Forums
The Chronicle Review
Forums
Live Discussions

Careers
News & Advice
My Career homepage
Search jobs
by position type
by discipline/field
by state/region
by institution
Tools & Resources
Employer Profiles

Sponsored Information
& Solutions
Campus Viewpoints
Services
Help
Contact us
Subscribe
Manage your account
Advertise with us
Rights & permissions

That evidence led to the creation of the Committee on Women
Faculty in the School of Science, which in turn documented that - through subtle and largely unconscious discrimination -- most
of the senior female professors in the school had received lower
salaries and fewer resources for research than their male
counterparts, and had been excluded from significant roles within
their departments. Once the committee presented its preliminary
findings to Robert J. Birgeneau, the dean of the school, in 1995,
he took prompt action to redress inequities.
He first addressed problems that can seriously impede
productivity in research and teaching, and he redistributed more
equally the benefits that signal institutional respect for faculty
members. For example, a number of senior women who had been
underpaid received salary increases; several women who had not
received discretionary funds from the administration for years got
money for research; some women got more space; and some got
funds for renovations of their labs or offices. Birgeneau also
worked with department heads to insure that female professors
were asked to join committees involved in hiring new faculty
members, and he helped several departments recruit new senior
female professors.
Those efforts have led to an increase in the number of female
faculty members in science, most notably in tenured positions.
They also have improved the professional lives of many tenured
women. As one professor told me recently, "I had decided to
leave M.I.T., but when they showed that they appreciated me and
my area of research, I decided to stay. As a result of the dean's
and the department head's actions over the past two years, we
have become the No. 1 department in my field in the country. I
am extremely happy here now."
"I was unhappy at M.I.T. for more than a decade," another woman
had commented earlier. "I thought it was the price you paid if you
wanted to be a scientist at an elite academic institution. After the
committee formed and the dean responded, my life began to
change. My research blossomed, my funding tripled. Now I love
every aspect of my job. It is hard to understand how I survived
those years -- or why."
Until this March, the work of the Committee on Women Faculty
in the School of Science had been largely unknown at M.I.T.
Determined that its successes be publicized more widely, Lotte

Bailyn, chair of the M.I.T. faculty, encouraged the dean and
members of the committee to produce a report on its work that
would protect the confidentiality of the data that the committee
had collected. That was the report released in March. It was
accompanied by comments from Charles M. Vest, president of
M.I.T.; Dean Birgeneau; and Professor Bailyn. All three accepted
the conclusion that female faculty members had been the object
of gender discrimination. Further, the administration praised the
courage and leadership of the women who had brought the
problem to light.
The response to the report's release was unanticipated. Within
days, the report and the administration's endorsement of its
conclusions received front-page coverage in The Boston Globe
and The New York Times. Numerous articles and editorials soon
followed in newspapers around the country. I was invited to the
White House, where President and Mrs. Clinton and Labor
Secretary Alexis M. Herman praised the courage of the M.I.T.
administration and the tenured female faculty members in science,
and expressed their hope that M.I.T.'s handling of gender
discrimination could serve as a model for other institutions.
The report also elicited an outpouring of e-mail messages to
administrators and female faculty members at M.I.T. who had
been involved in the study. Many messages congratulated M.I.T.
on its honesty; many also reported that gender discrimination is
alive and well at the writers' institutions, too. The most moving
messages came from women who had conducted studies of
gender bias on their own campuses, or who had fought
discrimination as individuals, only to be told by their
administrators that their perceptions and data were wrong, that
there was no gender discrimination. A number of those cases have
led to lawsuits.
Together, the messages suggest that gender bias is widespread in
academe, and they raise the possibility that it is present in
medicine, the law, and business as well. At the White House,
where I listened to women who work in diverse occupations, I
learned that the problem may be universal in the workplace.
The release of the report has already led to efforts to analyze the
status of female faculty members at M.I.T.'s other schools. Robert
A. Brown, the provost, and Lawrence S. Bacow, the chancellor,
have stat ed that they are committed to working for meaningful
change.
Given the successes in the School of Science; the support of the
president, provost, and chancellor; and the positive response to
the report, one might think that gender bias has been eradicated at
M.I.T. Although I believe the events I have described may prove
to be a quantum leap toward a solution, the changes so far have
come from above, while the problem of gender bias that the
committee documented originates at the level of the departments.
Have significant changes occurred at that level?
In some departments where the dean worked closely with
administrators to reverse and prevent the marginalization of
tenured female faculty members, there appears to be a heightened
awareness of gender discrimination. However, within M.I.T., the
most striking response to the release of "A Study on the Status of
Women Faculty in Science at MIT" has been profound silence.
Worse, some administrators have stated that gender bias does not
exist in their departments or centers. Thus, at the level where
discrimination is practiced, it appears that little has changed. The
lack of understanding that precipitated the initiative in the first
place, and that apparently has been common at other institutions
as well, is still present in some parts of M.I.T.
While disappointing, perhaps such a response should not be

surprising. The senior female faculty members and the three men
who served on the committee spent many dozens of hours
documenting and discussing gender bias. But the roughly 900
remaining faculty members at M.I.T., including about 225 in the
School of Science who did not participate in the report, did not
have the benefit of that experience. Some faculty members may
find it difficult to accept the conclusions of others about the
existence of gender bias. Some female faculty members suspect
that the silence around us exists because many of our colleagues
do not yet believe, or at least do not understand, the results of the
report.
Besides not having had the benefit of participating in in-depth
discussions of the data, many faculty members have had few
opportunities to observe gender bias at M.I.T. We have learned
that recognizing discrimination -- no matter how egregious -against a single woman is difficult. Nor is it usually sufficient to
open one's eyes to understanding how unconscious assumptions
concerning gender can result in inequalities between male and
female faculty members. Because most departmental
administrators deal with only a few female professors -- who are
rare at M.I.T. -- they can easily fail to see the pattern of
discrimination that emerged when data for all of the tenured
women in science were pooled. Many administrators assume,
incorrectly, that they will be able to detect bias if it is occurring in
their departments. Not only is that untrue, but those individuals
may even be a source of bias.
If many faculty members and administrators are still unable to
recognize subtle gender bias, how can the changes that took place
in the School of Science be made permanent? The committee
recognized that reforms could easily be undone if Dean Birgeneau
and many of the committee members were to leave the school.
Therefore, the members wrote a set of recommendations to try to
institutionalize the progress that has occurred. Those
recommendations include continuous monitoring of data by
administrators and female professors to insure equity, placing
female faculty members on search committees and in decisionmaking positions within departments, and removing
administrators who knowingly discriminate against female faculty
members.
It was to help insure permanent change by educating faculty
members and by making it impossible for administrators to claim
ignorance that Professor Bailyn pressed for the release of the
report in March. She also called for all of the schools at M.I.T. to
establish committees to monitor gender equity. The deans of the
four other schools are working now with female faculty members
to set up those committees.
I believe that the public commitment of powerful administrators at
M.I.T. -- particularly President Vest -- to eradicate gender bias
there by working with female faculty members is a milestone in
the long struggle to end gender discrimination in academe. In the
end, it will enable M.I.T. to make institutional changes that will
alter behaviors at the departmental level even if some hearts and
minds lag behind.
The 15 tenured female faculty members in science at M.I.T. who
first collected evidence of systematic discrimination against
women were highly unpolitical individuals. We were motivated
primarily by our desire to facilitate our research and teaching.
When some of us resorted to tape measures to quantify the
unequal distribution of space between male and female
professors, we were seeking only to prepare a study so convincing
that no one could deny us equity.
Recently, I asked President Vest why administrators at M.I.T. had
worked with the women, accepted the study, and even agreed to

make it public.
"It's the scientific mindset," he replied. "Give us convincing data,
and we go with it."
Dean Birgeneau has said he was primarily motivated by a sense of
fairness: "The women were being treated unfairly, and this was
simply wrong."
It seems surprising that a group of scientists intent only on getting
back to the laboratory should have uncovered what appears to be
the need for a true social revolution. Civil-rights laws and
affirmative action got women in the door of the academy and
allowed a few to become highly successful scientists. But, as we
have finally learned after 30 years, women were seldom granted
equality. Even progressive policies could not completely erase a
form of gender discrimination that, as Professor Bailyn wrote, is
"subtle but pervasive, and stems largely from unconscious ways
of thinking that have been socialized into all of us, men and
women alike."
We have known for decades that few women have participated in
making the important decisions that shape our universities.
Further, as professors of science, we have long known that
although we admit nearly equal numbers of male and female
students in many areas of science, and although scientific talent
and brilliance are equally distributed between the sexes, the
career prospects for men and women are not equal. When we
began our study, in the summer of 1994, I was amazed that after
25 years of affirmative action, there were only 15 tenured female
faculty members in the six departments of science at M.I.T.,
compared with 194 tenured men. By the time we had finished the
study, I was amazed that there were so many tenured women: It is
notable that even 15 had succeeded in the face of such odds.
Looking back on what I have learned, I wonder now if there
could be a better place for a social revolution to begin than at an
institution of science and learning. Perhaps the ability of a
handful of science professors to quantify gender bias, and the
willingness of a few M.I.T. administrators to support their
findings, will help open the way to true equality in the workplace.
Nancy Hopkins is a professor of biology at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology.
JOIN THE DEBATE

Copyright © 1999 by The Chronicle of Higher Education

