730 BERKELEY TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL __ [Vol. 34:705

Table 2. Proportion of individuals in State of Idem who pose risk, by racial group
and education level.

 

 

 

ryglione gio fembibed
White 0.825 0.25 0.48
Black 0.62 0.375 0.52
Combined 0.7 0.3 0.5

 

 

 

Although it can be considered fair because it makes no distinction
between individuals by their race or education level, such a tool sacrifices
accutacy as an assessment algorithm. Next, consider County B, which bars
the explicit use of race but permits some consideration of education level.
Such a tool can infer an individual’s race through their education level. For
example, as Table 2 illustrates, the average risk rate for black defendants with
no high school diploma is 0.62, but a failure to account for race and to use
the combined risk score would mean that black individuals with no high
school degree will be detained at a higher rate of 0.7. Finally, take County C,
which uses race to cortect for inadvertent bias from a proxy (here, education
level). By considering both an individual’s race and education level and
thereby explicitly accounting for proxies, County C will achieve demographic
parity in the manner illustrated below in Table 3.

Table 3. Rate of detention determined by tool in County C, by racial group and
education level.

 

 

 

No HLS. ELS: Combined
Diploma
White 0.85 0.27 0.5
Black 0.6 0.35 0.5

 

In County C, the same black individual with no high school diploma will
face a 0.6 likelihood of being detained, a proportion that is lower than that in
County B. Combining these three examples, the result is that three counties
using the same instrument can each attempt to account for “any limitations
of the particular risk assessment tool used by [PAS], including ... [w]hether
any scientific research has raised questions that the particular instrument
unfairly classifies offenders based on race, ethnicity, gender, or income

 

risk scores, which are then categorized using thresholds set by the global Council. See
discussion infra Section IV.C.

724 BERKELEY TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL __ [Vol. 34:705

comments on this proposed tule, “[t]his statement of purpose needs some
specific regulations to make it meaningful.””’ Might there be reasons for local
tailoring of these policy choices? Perhaps. Yet there are also institutional
tradeoffs when global rules rely on local determinations to craft the policy. A
framework that requires too much localization to craft the basic rules of the
policy will not be globally consistent, and that lack of uniformity might itself
be seen as unfair.

Regardless of the equilibrium that is ultimately struck, when human life
and liberty are at stake, these choices should be made intentionally, with an
awareness of the tradeoffs. Without designing a statute to account for these
global-local tensions and tradeoffs, we risk encoding these understandings
implicitly, in ways that are opaque and may resist democratic accountability.
But the ways that risk assessment algorithms interact with systems of local
and global discretion presently appear to be the inadvertent consequences of
particular policy choices—not intentionally selected outcomes. With an
emphasis on global-local tensions, Part IV surveys some of the ways in which
implementing SB 10 as a technical matter entails policy judgments that are
not explicitly specified by the statute.

IV. ALGORITHMIC RISK ASSESSMENT IN PRACTICE:
POTENTIAL CONSEQUENCES OF THE SB 10
FRAMEWORK

Using SB 10 as an example of a risk assessment statute, this Part
considers how a statistically-driven tisk assessment tool might operate in
practice. This Part specifically focuses on how SB 10’s framework might
create three categories of technical issues: proxies, Simpson’s paradox, and
thresholding. This detailed analysis and associated modelling not only
highlights potential specific risks of SB 10, but also illustrates more generally
the manner in which a statute’s initial allocation of global and local authority
will produce unexpected technical—and associated policy—consequences.

 

The first category, proxies, refers to features that would typically be
considered valid for risk assessment, yet which are correlated with protected
attributes that may not be considered for legal or policy reasons. SB 10 does

 

90. Human Rights Watch Comments on California Judicial Council Bail Reform Rules, HUM.
Rrs. WATCH (Dec. 10, 2018, 9:00 AM), https://www.hrw.org/news/2018/12/10/human-
rights-watch-comments-california-judicial-council-bail-reform-rules [https://perma.cc/
79U9-IKSAA]; see also Written Comments of the Electronic Frontier Foundation on Proposed Rules 4.10
and 4.40—Invitation to Comment #SP18-23, ELECTRONIC FRONTIER FOUND. 15 (Dec. 14,
2018), https://www.eff.org/files/2018/12/18/written_comments_of_the_electronic_
frontier_foundation_on_proposed_rules_4.10_and_4.40_invitation_to_comment_sp18-
23_december_14_2018.pdf [https://perma.cc/7HSC-T8TB].

710 BERKELEY TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL __ [Vol. 34:705

This Article uses SB 10 to explore a subset of these challenges,
emphasizing particular technical issues that arise from the way that this
statute allocates authority and discretion. It proceeds in four Parts. Part I
first surveys the adoption of actuarial criminal justice tools in the twentieth
century. It then canvasses recent state moves to implement algorithmic risk
assessment tools as well as associated legal controversies and scholarly
critiques. Part HI describes SB 10 as an example of one state’s plan to deploy
tisk assessment instruments. Specifically, it summarizes particular SB 10
provisions and their legislative history, focusing on how the provisions grant
authority and discretion to institutional actors at both the state and local
level. Part IV applies this analysis with a series of hypothetical narratives
drawn from real-world demographic data in California. These narratives
illustrate how even the best-intentioned actions can lead to unanticipated or
undesirable results, given the way that a statute allocates authority to state
and county-level actors. Part V considers how to design risk assessment
statutes in light of the inevitable g/obal-local tension. It closes by proposing that
a policy choice to insert too many /ayers of discretion is likely to be problematic,
no matter which tool is adopted, before offering several specific
recommendations that could improve risk assessment statutes in general and
SB 10 in particular.

Il. RISK ASSESSMENT TOOLS
A. ACTUARIAL JUSTICE: A BRIEF HISTORY

Contemporary risk assessment instruments share a common heritage
with far older criminal justice interventions. The link between old and new is
the idea that public officers can make predictions about an individual’s
behavior that should inform the treatment of that individual today. This
Section’s stylized overview contextualizes contemporary algorithms as the
latest iteration of this historic phenomenon.

For much of the twentieth century, choices about human liberty
depended on obviously subjective factors. In the 1920s, parole boards began
frequently invoking “crime prediction” in decisions about sentence length."
Factors included “‘the look in the prisoner’s eye, or [parole] board
members’ personal experiences, intuition, and biases.’ And in making bail

 

15. See Thomas Mathiesen, Selective Incapacitation Revisited, 22 L. & HUM. BEHAV. 455,
458-59 (1998); Kevin R. Reitz, “Risk Discretion” at Sentencing, 30 FED. SENT’G REP. 68, 70
(2017) (“[P]rison sentence lengths in most U.S. jurisdictions are already based on predictions
or guesses about offenders’ future behavior, and this has been true—in multiple settings—
for at least a century.”).

16. Reitz, supra note 15, at 69 (citing DAVID J. ROTHMAN, CONSCIENCE AND
CONVENIENCE: THE ASYLUM AND ITS ALTERNATIVES IN PROGRESSIVE AMERICA (1980);

2019] ALGORITHMIC RISK ASSESSMENT 743

an impasse where the risk group assignment cannot be made fair without
setting different thresholds for different protected subgroups or altering the
tools with respect to the given threshold set. In the former instance, the
global entity that sets the threshold would need additional discretion to set
different qualitative risk levels associated with different subgroups, however
identified. In the latter instance, localities would need additional discretion to
develop and validate tools that meet the subgroup-independent thresholds in
the context of that locality. Risk assessment policies, in short, must permit
additional tailoring if the global thresholds are to be considered fair in
particular counties, whether the discretion to tailor as required is allocated
globally or locally.

Define Fairness and Specify Who Decides. Even if no single definition of
fairness is likely to be without controversy, risk assessment statutes should
say what they intend as a “echnical matter when it comes to such a critically
contested term. When these points are unspecified, they still must be made,
ut the choices will tend to be implicit—as a matter of technical
development—without upfront consideration, adequate opportunity for
public debate, or ongoing accountability for the decision. By first clearly
defining whether a global or local entity is responsible for arriving at what is
fair, and, second, designing policies that designate what fairness means as a
technical matter, we can better begin to grapple with the underlying
normative implications of the statutory text. A critical matter for future
research is whether, as a normative matter, fairness must be defined locally:
est the top-down imposition infringe on community values—or globally-
est too much tailoring to community norms contravene non-negotiable first
principles.

 

 

 

VI. CONCLUSION

Developing and deploying tisk assessment algorithms without
considering how they will fit within new and existing institutions, norms, and
preexisting technical and policy constraints is a mistake. The example of SB
10 highlights how risk assessment tools are not instruments that operate in
isolation; rather, they are developed and deployed within legal institutions
and require input from global and local decisionmakers. Control of these
instruments, in turn, requires keener attention to the design of tisk
assessment policies, and specifically to who is granted authority and
discretion over the tools. When a particular statute or regulation empowers
an actor at the global level to develop a list of approved tools, for instance,
how does this choice interact with the technical needs of local actors or cabin
local policy discretion? Conversely, if a statute or regulation requires local
validation, what limitations does this place on global oversight of the tool?

722 BERKELEY TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL __ [Vol. 34:705

different for white and black defendants in two jurisdictions, and the same
high/medium/low risk categorization applies globally, then different
proportions of individuals from each race will be affected in each
jutisdiction.®’ Reserving any normative critique of such a result, the practical
upshot is the link between global and local authority. In a regime like SB 10
that relies on a centralized definition of risk levels, global policy choices set
levels of risk at specified numerical points. These global decisions implement
a particular technical understanding of fairness that controls local outcomes
(as a policy matter), potentially without accounting for local differences (as a
technical matter). This outcome is the byproduct of technical and policy
constraints, as opposed to a consciously-pursued and explicitly stated
definition of what is fair."

Second, parsing these outcomes is all the more complicated in the case of
SB 10 because other portions of the statute cut the other way: they grant
more authority to localities, with less precise global guidance. Specifically, SB
10 specifies a presumptive outcome for individuals that PAS assesses as
“high-risk” and “low-tisk,” subject to judicial override as well as a host of
exceptions enumerated in the text.’ For individuals deemed high and low

 

80. The COMPAS debate centers on the use of different base rates within a single
county. As explored in detail infra Part IV, an important, yet underexplored, technical
consideration involves the proper unit of analysis. This Article considers inter-county
differences, including how different county-by-county racial demographics further
problematize the initial decision of how to set global and local authority.

81. Some other risk assessment bills have been more explicit on this point. For
example, Idaho House Bill No. 118 provided an explicit definition of fairness: “ ‘Free of
bias’ means that an algorithm has been formally tested and shown to predict successfully at
the same rate for those in protected classes as those not in protected classes, and the rate of
error is balanced as between protected classes and those not in protected classes.” H.R. 118,
65th Sess., 1st Reg. Sess. (idaho 2019). This draft thus required predictive parity among
protected classes, although this language was removed from the final statute. See Act of July
1, 2019, ch. 258, 2019 Idaho Sess. Laws (2019). For a discussion of predictive parity, the
measure adopted by the controversial COMPAS tool, see supra text accompanying note 6.
The California statute does not contain such an explicit operationalization of what fairness
requires. Whether the definition in the original Idaho draft is normatively desirable is beyond
the scope of this Article.

82. See Cal. S.B. 10 § 4 (enacted) (adding CAL. PENAL CODE §§ 1320.20, 1320.10)
(referring to high risk and low risk, respectively). As the Judicial Council’s proposed rules
explain:

Prearraignment release of arrested persons will depend on their assessed
risk level, determined by their score from the risk assessment tool and
other information gathered from an investigation done by Pretrial
Assessment Services, as follows:

e ~=Low tisk: Pretrial Assessment Services must release persons
assessed as low risk prior to arraignment, on their own
recognizance except for those persons arrested for

2019] ALGORITHMIC RISK ASSESSMENT 721

e Consult with the Chief Probation Officers of California
and “assist courts in developing contracts with local
public entities regarding the provision of [PAS].””

These provisions, read in a vacuum, may seem unproblematic. Some
form of overarching oversight is intuitively appealing, particularly to the
extent that a centralized authority like the Council can prevent local
jurisdictions from relying on a tool that is biased, discriminatory, opaque, or
otherwise problematic. Furthermore, the form of oversight prescribed in SB
10 may appear to simply emulate the relationship between the Council and
local courts in other contexts.

In the algorithmic context, however, applying the same oversight strategy
is insufficient at best and counterproductive at worst. First, centralized
guidance from the Council does not guarantee uniform outcomes. Consider,
for instance, how risk levels are determined. According to the statutory text,
the Council is to appoint a “panel of experts and judicial officers ... [that]
shall designate “low,” “medium,” and “high” tisk levels based upon the
scores of levels provided by the instrument for use by [PAS].””* In other
words, for each county, a PAS is to generate risk “scores or levels,” and a
statewide panel appointed by the Council is to designate which PAS “scores
or levels” are associated with high, medium, or low tisk levels.” The choice
of risk threshold—which triggers the decision about how to treat an
individual—is thus a global one.

Applying such a fixed global choice, however, may result in different
outcomes in different local jurisdictions. As Part IV reveals, relying on the
same low, medium, and high risk cutoffs in counties with different
demographic distributions may produce different racial, gender, or
socioeconomic effects, by county. The COMPAS debate about algorithmic
unfairness atises in part from this point: if the baseline rate of arrest is

 

77. Id. (adding CAL, PENAL CODE § 1320.24(e)(4)).

78. See id. (adding CAL. PENAL CODE §1320.25(a), 1320.24(e)(7)) (directing the Judicial
Council to “convene a panel of subject matter experts and judicial officers” to “designate
‘low,’ ‘medium,’ and ‘high’ risk levels based upon the scores or levels provided by the
instrument for use by Pretrial Assessment Services”). This text is confusing as written
because the PAS “risk score” may “include a numerical value or terms such as ‘high,’
‘medium,’ or ‘low’ risk,” yet the high/medium/low “risk level” is also to be set by the
Council, based on the PAS risk score. See id. (adding CAL. PENAL CODE § 1320.25(a)).

79. Id. The statute does not clearly state whether the threshold set by the Council can
be county-specific, or whether it must be uniform across the state. If it must be uniform
across the state, then this would imply a coordinated calibration of the models, which would
stymie local validation of the instrument. If it can be county-specific, then there would be
more local variation regarding how the statute treats individuals at a given quantitative risk
level. For further discussion, see énfra Parts IV-V.

726 BERKELEY TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL __ [Vol. 34:705

a sensitive attribute, such as race, in making predictions about whether a
given individual will recidivate. As the growing fairness literature documents,
this solution does not guarantee that the tool is free of bias based on that
attribute.

The problem is one of proxies,’ a phenomenon wherein other valid
features can be highly correlated with the protected attribute. Where a proxy
for a protected attribute exists, decisions that incorporate a proxy variable
may be biased, even when the decision does not explicitly incorporate the
protected attribute.” Consider a non-technical example: the problematic
historic practice of “redlining” a neighborhood, thereby permitting racial
discrimination without explicit consideration of race.’ Or at the individual
level, a person’s name can be a proxy for gender, such that making a decision
about Aaron versus Erin could permit gender discrimination without explicit
consideration of gender.

Unfortunately, simply forbidding the use of proxies for protected
attributes is not a viable solution. Consider a feature like education.
Information about an individual’s education, such as highest degree obtained
and undergraduate major, is correlated with gender,” such that education acts

 

94. Here, a proxy variable is a feature that can be used to infer one or more of the
protected attribute values of an individual. A well-known example proxy for race is zip code.

95. See Eckhouse et al., Layers of Bias, supra note 10, at 15-16. Eckhouse stated:

[E]ven a determined effort to exclude proxies for race, class, or other

marginalized categories [from an algorithm] is not likely to be successful

.... [O]mitting race from the set of variables in the original data set does

not mean race is not included in the analysis; it merely induces remaining

variables that are correlated with both race and the outcome variable to

behave as if they are, in part, proxies for race.
Id. (citing Solon Barocas & Andrew Selbst, Big Data’s Disparate Impact, 104 CALIF. L. REV. 721
(2016); Cynthia Dwork et al., Fairness Through Awareness, PROCS. 3RD INNOVATIONS
THEORETICAL COMPUTER SCI. CONF., 214 (2012); Devin G. Pope & Justin R. Sydnor,
Implementing Anti-Discrimination Policies in Statistical Profiling Models, 3 AM. ECON. J.: ECON.
POL., 206-31 (2011)).

96. “Redlining” refers to the 1930s federal Home Owners’ Loan Corporation’s practice
of marking neighborhoods in green, blue, yellow, or red to demarcate their credit risk. Under
this schema, “[t]he ‘tedlined’ areas were the ones local lenders discounted as credit risks, in
large part because of the residents’ racial and ethnic demographics. They also took into
account local amenities and home prices.” Tracy Jan, Redlining Was Banned 50 Years Ago. It’s
Still Hurting Minorities Today, W/ASH. Post (Mar. 28, 2019), https://www.washington
post.com/news/wonk/wp/2018/03/28/redlining-was-banned-50-years-ago-its-still-hurting-
minorities-today [https://perma.cc/HU68-WAWK]. This practice allowed loans to be
systematically denied to residents of minority-dominated neighborhoods by invoking credit
risk without explicitly referring to race or ethnicity. Such discrimination was possible
because, as operationalized, credit risk was in fact a proxy for race.

97. For a visualization of this data, which is provided by the U.S. Census Bureau, see
Detailed Educational Attainment Sex Ratio, STAT. ATLAS (Sept. 4, 2018),

2019] ALGORITHMIC RISK ASSESSMENT 727

as a proxy for gender.”* However, it is not feasible to dismiss it entirely as a
factor in decisionmaking because it may in fact be relevant to the decision.
For instance, the highest degree obtained or an individual’s specialty area
could be highly salient in hiring an individual. A proxy variable, in short, may
include crucial information for making predictions.” Accordingly, rather than
omitting a proxy variable entirely, it may be more valuable to exploit it for
prediction while still limiting the bias due to its correlation with the protected
attributes. In fact, several works have suggested that the only way to make a
system truly fair, even from the effects of proxies, is to collect and take into
account the protected attribute values at the learning or prediction stage.'”
SB 10’s framework allocates global and local authority in a way that can
produce several proxy-related issues. Recall that the Council is to “[clompile
and maintain a list of validated pretrial risk assessment tools,”'"' yet a county-
level superior court and the associated PAS are to ensure that the tool used
in their particular jurisdiction does not unfairly classify. At the same time,
assuming that the Council’s rules regarding validation are in line with
technical best practices, any such rules must provide for local validation and

 

https: / /statisticalatlas.com/state/California/Educational-Attainment# figure /detailed-
educational-attainment-sex-ratio [https://perma.cc/4NJR-LEQ2].

98. Informally, correlation or dependence indicates whether a proxy variable can be
used to predict one or more protected attributes. Approaches to quantify this relationship
include the Pearson correlation coefficient, which measures a linear relationship between
variables, and mutual information, which measures probabilistic dependence between
variables. Although not explored in detail here, proxies also raise practical difficulties.
Determining both the correct statistical definition to quantify the proxy effect and whether a
variable is an unacceptable proxy, whether accomplished through numerical thresholds or
qualitative assessment, demands substantial time and resources. These costly investments
decrease the efficiency gains of a turn to algorithmic risk assessment.

99. For an excellent discussion of proxies in the disparate impact context, see Barocas
& Selbst, supra note 95, at 720-22.

100. Some approaches include learning new representations of the non-protected
attributes such that they still have predictive power while remaining independent of the
protected attribute. These strategies generally require accounting for the protected attribute
values at both the learning and prediction stage. At the learning stage, the restriction is
placed on the data used to develop the tool. At the prediction stage, the restriction is on the
features that the tool gets as input to make a prediction. See Richard Zemel et al., Learning
Fair Representations, PROC. 30TH INT’?L CONF. ON MACHINE LEARNING 325 (2013); Michael
Feldman et al., Certifying and Removing Disparate Impact, PROC. 21st ACM SIGKDD INT'L
CONF. ON KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY & DATA MINING 259 (2015). Moreover, it is possible
to make a learned tool fair by setting protected attribute specific threshold rules. See Sam
Corbett-Davies et al., Algorithmic Decision Making and the Cost of Fairness, PROC. 21st ACM
SIGKDD INT’L CONF. ON KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY & DATA MINING 797 (2017).

101. S.B. 10, 2017-2018 Leg., Reg. Sess. § 1320.24(e)(1) (Cal. 2018) (enacted) (codified
at CAL. GOV'T CODE § 27771 and scattered Sections of CAL. PENAL CODE).

714 BERKELEY TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL __ [Vol. 34:705

essential to resist “automation bias” and ensure adequate oversight of the
tool’s fairness and accuracy.** As this Article underscores, the way that this
predictive enterprise operates turns not only on individual choices, but also
on initial policy choices about how to constrain or channel discretion and
decisional authority.

B. ALGORITHMIC RISK ASSESSMENT: A RECENT HISTORY

The practical stakes are high because state and local jurisdictions in the
United States are increasingly turning to algorithmic risk assessment. Though
existing implementations span the pretrial and sentencing context, this
Article focuses on pretrial risk assessment procedures like SB 10.” In the last
seven years alone, half of U.S. states have either implemented or are seriously
considering the use of some form of risk assessment tools in pretrial
settings.” And many of these developments have been quite recent.
According to the National Council of State Legislatures (NCSL)," in 2017

 

38. Of Danielle Citron, Technological Due Process, 85 WASH. U. L. REV. 1249, 1271-72
(2008) (“The impulse to follow a computer’s recommendation flows from human
‘automation bias’-—the ‘use of automation as a heuristic replacement for vigilant information
seeking and processing.’”) (quoting Linda J. Skitka et al., Automation Bias and Errors: Are
Crews Better Than Individuals?, 10 INV’L J. AVIATION PSYCHOL. 85, 86 (2000).

39. This narrower focus permits more detailed analysis of a particular set of
interventions, without inadvertently conflating pretrial risk assessment and other forms of
algorithmic criminal justice decisions, such as sentencing. However, this Article’s broader
conclusions about the importance of looking at the policy design, as well as its analysis of
systems in which discretion is spread across global and local layers, are more generally
applicable.

40. This figure is calculated from reports published by the National Conference of
State Legislatures. See Trends in Pretrial Release: State Legislation Update Civil and Criminal Justice 1,
NCSL (Apr. 2018), http://www.ncsl.org/portals/1/ImageLibrary/WebImages/Criminal%
20Justice/pretrialEnactments_2017_v03.pdf — [https://perma.cc/GYS8-HS55];_ Trends in
Pretrial Release: State Legislation Update Civil and Criminal Justice 1, NCSL (Mar. 2015),
http://www.ncsl.org/portals/1/ImageLibrary/WebImages/Criminal%20Justice/ NCSL%20
pretrialTrends_v05.pdf [https://perma.cc/B88P-CHAK].

41. This research was funded in part by the Laura and John Arnold Foundation, now
known as Arnold Ventures. This organization has supported the development of a widely
used Public Safety Assessment (PSA) tool that has been adopted or is being implemented in
over forty jurisdictions. See Judicial Release Decisions, ARNOLD VENTURES,
https://www.arnoldventures.org/work/release-decision-making — [https://perma.cc/G9CP-
274Q] (last visited Sept. 20, 2019). Though beyond the scope of this Article, the lack of
independent research or oversight of these tools by bodies that are not also invested in
creating them is disconcerting. Cf The Use of Pretrial “Risk Assessment” Instruments: A Shared
Statement of Civil Rights Concerns 7, Civ. Rrs. Docs, http://civilrightsdocs.info/pdf/criminal-
justice/Pretrial-Risk-Assessment-Full.pdf [https://perma.cc/86ZC-Q8DR] [hereinafter A
Shared Statement of Civil Rights Concerns| (last visited Sept. 20, 2019) (“[A] pretrial risk
assessment instrument must be transparent, independently validated, and open to challenge

2019] ALGORITHMIC RISK ASSESSMENT 717

itself and not the algorithm.’ From this point of view, the salient factor is
the unequal base rates of recidivism among racial groups in the observed
population that makes up the machine learning dataset. Given such baseline
differences, any tool that applies proportionate outcomes across the board at
a particular risk level will have proportionately different effects on different
racial groups. The debate about technical fairness thus connects to bedrock
civil society concerns about racial inequity in the criminal justice system as a
whole, even as proponents of these tools assert that they represent more
objective, fairer ways to make criminal justice decisions.

Recent legal scholarship echoes these points. A growing literature
cautions against algorithmic risk assessment as an automatic key to a fairer
criminal justice system. In addition to critiques of the biased racial impact of
tisk assessment™ and evaluations of what fairness means in practice,”
scholars have begun to assess critically the different ways in which
algorithmic systems may be unfair. For example, a recent article by Laurel
Eckhouse, Kristian Lum, Cynthia Conti-Cook, and Julie Ciccolini proposes
three “layers of bias” that can arise in risk assessment models: first, whether
the statistical model of fairness used is sound and desirable; second, whether
the data itself contains embedded biases; and finally, whether it is
fundamentally fair to make individualized criminal justice decisions based on
statistical patterns derived from groups.” This third prong questions whether
it is constitutionally valid to make criminal justice choices in this way, raising
both equal protection and due process concerns.”’ Adding to the dialog
around constitutional principles and new technical interventions, Brandon

 

53. See William Dieterich et al., COMPAS Risk Scales: Demonstrating Accuracy Equity and
Predictive Parity, NORTHPOINTE (July 8, 2016), https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/
2998391-ProPublica~-Commentary-Final-070616.html [https://perma.cc/2TDA-25L8].

54. See, eg. Bernard E. Harcourt, Risk as a Proxy for Race: The Dangers of Risk Assessment,
27 FED. SENT’G REP. 237, 237 (2015) (“[R]isk today has collapsed into prior criminal history,
and prior criminal history has become a proxy for race. The combination of these two trends
means that using risk assessment tools is going to significantly exacerbate the unacceptable
racial disparities in our criminal justice system.”).

55. Again, there are myriad technical and ethical definitions that may be at odds with
one another and with other values such as accuracy. For a video tutorial canvassing these
issues, see Aaron Roth, Tradeoffs Between Fairness and Accuracy in Machine Learning, YOUTUBE
Jan. 30, 2017), https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tBpd4I[x4BYM | [https://perma.cc/
EWD7-NL6D); see a/so text accompanying notes 8-10 and sources cited therein.

56. See Eckhouse et al., Layers of Bias, supra note 10, at 1.

57. This branch of the literature relies on earlier work by scholars such as Sonja Starr,
who has argued that actuarial risk assessments violate the Equal Protection Clause of the
U.S. Constitution. See Sonja B. Starr, Evidence-Based Sentencing and The Scientific Rationalization of
Discrimination, 66 STAN. L. REV. 803 (2014). But of sources cited infra note 105 (suggesting
that contemporary Equal Protection jurisprudence is not an apt fit for algorithmic criminal
justice).

712 BERKELEY TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL __ [Vol. 34:705

“focus on treatment or rehabilitation of the offender to prevent reoffending,
rather than simply predict recidivism .... This approach to risk differs
importantly from the correctional use of static risk for preventive or selective
incapacitation, diversion, or deterrence of recidivism through the
administration of harsh penalties ... ””” The fourth generation of tools
continued to use vatious combinations of static and dynamic inputs while
according more weight to the individualized needs of the defendant.” The
fifth generation entails the application of machine learning techniques,
discussed below, to provide more up-to-date predictions that take far more
factors into account.”

Driven in large part by political forces and associated policy changes,” a
second and partially overlapping shift attempted to limit what categories of
inputs were permissible when imposing bail. The early 1960s witnessed
mounting concern with overcrowded jails and the detention of less wealthy
defendants, even when such individuals did not pose any public safety tisk if
they were released.” These reform efforts culminated with Congress’s
enactment of the 1966 Bail Reform Act, which aimed to “minimize reliance
on money baill[,] . . . established that a defendant’s financial status should not
be a reason for denying their pretrial release, made clear that the risk of
nonappearance at trial should be the only criterion considered when bail is
assessed, and ... generally forb[ade] judges from treating a defendant’s
dangerousness or risk to public safety as a reason for detention.”

But this initiative did not endure. In the 1970s and 1980s, the federal
government undertook a fundamental reworking of the underlying reason for
imposing bail.” Catalyzed by mounting public unrest in the civil rights era
and the Nixon Administration’s “tough on crime” stance, a second set of
reforms effectively reversed the earlier policy. Rather than set terms that
ensured a defendant’s presence in court, pretrial detention emphasized the
tisk that the defendant would commit future crimes and threaten public
safety.” In practice, as it emerged, this shift reframed the salient questions
and asked judges to assess a defendant’s perceived “dangerousness” to

 

23. Hannah-Moffat, supra note 17, at 276. For a more detailed account of risk/needs
assessment in more modern tools, see /d. at 274-76.

24. Garrett & Monahan, Judging Risk, supra note 11 (manuscript at 10).

25. Id.

26. This overview is indebted to John Logan Koepke & David G. Robinson’s summary
of this history. See Koepke & Robinson, Danger Ahead, supra note 13, at 1731-42.

27. See Garrett & Monahan, Judging Risk, supra note 11 (manuscript at 9).

28. Id. (citing United States v. Leathers, 412 F.2d 169, 171 (D.C. Cir. 1969)).

29. For a more detailed survey of changing bail practices in the United States, see
Koepke & Robinson, Danger Ahead, supra note 13, at 1737-50.

30. Garrett & Monahan, Judging Risk, supra note 11 (manuscript at 10); see also Koepke
& Robinson, supra note 13, at 1739-43.

2019] ALGORITHMIC RISK ASSESSMENT 733

As Table 5 shows, the attainment rate of a four-year college degree in
each of seven California counties is higher among the white population than
among the Asian population, but the trend is reversed when these counties
are grouped together.

Turning back to algorithmic fairness, SB 10 would allow Simpson’s
paradox to occur if there is an opportunity for discrimination against a group
at the county level, yet the discrimination becomes undetectable or even
reverses direction at the state level, or vice versa.

For example, an individual’s education level is one factor that
contemporaty instruments often use.'" How might this consideration play
out in the SB 10 context? Suppose that at least some of the tools approved
by the Council take education level into account. Suppose, further, that the
seven counties shown above decide to adopt tisk assessment instrument E,
which considers education as a major feature. For the sake of argument, say
that tool E assigns a low numerical risk score to individuals with a four-year
college degree or higher, and that this assessment holds across each of the
seven counties. Assume that this quantitative risk score falls into the “low
risk” qualitative category for the state. In other words, across the state, tool
E’s assessment leads to the conclusion that individuals who have completed
four or more years of higher education are, collectively, a low risk group.

But this statewide result will not necessarily lead to uniform outcomes
across each of the counties in the state; to the contrary, such a scenario could
easily produce differential tisk assessments for members of different
demographic groups. Imagine, first, that an independent statewide auditor
wishes to confirm that the tool is not unfairly classifying based on ethnicity.
Given the cost and difficulty of validating with reference to each individual
county, such an entity is likely to validate the tool using the aggregate data
alone. Based on aggregate data, the tool could be rejected for discriminating
against the white population on the ground that the 0.03 difference between
the respective white and Asian assignment rates to the low-risk group is

 

110. For example, COMPAS, the tool that was used in the Loomis v. Wisconsin case,
considers education level. See PAMELA M. CASEY ET AL., OFFENDER RISK & NEEDS
ASSESSMENT INSTRUMENTS: A PRIMER FOR COURTS, NAT'L CTR. STATE Crs. A-21 (2014).
The Federal Pretrial Risk Assessment (PTRA) uses highest educational attainment as one of
the features of its logistic regression model. See Christopher T. Lowenkamp & Jay Whetzel,
The Development of an Actuarial Risk Assessment Instrument for U.S. Pretrial Services, 73 PED.
PROBATION 2 (2009), _ https://www.uscourts.gov/sites/default/files/73_2_3_0.pdf
[https://perma.cc/D23V-HYRY]. Several counties in Maryland also rely on locally-
developed tools that take education level into account. See Angela Roberts & Nora Eckert,
As Maryland Courts Meld Artificial Intelligence into Bail Decisions, Concerns Follow, CAP. NEWS
SERV. (Dec. 21, 2018), https://cnsmaryland.org/interactives/spring-2018/plea-bargain/
pretrial-riskscore.html [https://perma.cc/7QA2-K6ZB]; of Eaglin, supra note 10, at 81
(discussing factors, including education level, used in existing tools).

740 BERKELEY TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL __ [Vol. 34:705

SB 10 and begins to distill more generally applicable principles for the design
of risk assessment statutes and regulations.

Vv. PATHS FORWARD

Abstracting away from SB 10’s particulars, every risk assessment
algorithm inevitably entails local and global allocations of authority along two
related axes. One, which entity, at which level, is responsible for crafting the
relevant procedures and rules or standards. This is the more traditional policy
prong of a statute or regulation. Two, which entity, at which level, is
responsible for developing, testing, and applying the instrument itself,
potentially subject to local or global constraints or guidance. This is the more
technical prong of a statute or regulation.

In practice, moreover, the picture is even more complicated because risk
assessment does not allow such a crisp bifurcation of technical and policy
choices.'” Technical choices must account for local conditions to avoid
unfair results, yet law’s commitment to global first principles cuts against too
much tailoring by jurisdiction.

This tension is especially stark for a multi-level intervention like SB 10
because the Council’s proposed rules of court require each superior court
and its associated PAS to ensure that the tool is “accurate,” to assess whether
it has been appropriately validated, and to consider whether there has been
unfair classification.'”? Yet neither fairness nor the normatively proper
tradeoffs between fairness and other values, like accuracy, are self-defining.
Nor is there further delineation in either the statutory text or its legislative
history to clarify what it means for, say, an instrument to “unfairly classif[y]”
based on a sensitive charactetistic.'** The substance of these normative
requirements, accordingly, will be defined locally. And given this inevitable
tension between local tailoring and global commitments, clear oversight of
the system itself is all the more critical to ensure that the system itself
remains accountable. Too many /ayers of discretion at both the policy and
technical levels risk creating a policy black box in which implementing an
algorithm channels authority in unanticipated directions, potentially without

 

122. Cf Alicia Solow-Niederman, Administering Artificial Intelligence, 92 S$. CAL. L. REV.
(forthcoming 2020) (“Algorithmic and programming decisions structure human behavior.
These choices are in fact policy decisions that function at the most essential levels of
democratic governance and public interests. Put simply: Al development is an especially
stark example of how private coding choices are governance choices.”) (on file with
authors).

123. Proposed Rules 4.10 & 4.40, supra note 82, at 11-12.

124. See id. at 4, 11-12.

2019] ALGORITHMIC RISK ASSESSMENT 707

Algorithmic risk assessment begins with the premise that an algorithm
can provide a concrete measure of risk that informs a judge of salient facts
about the defendant. But this premise is questionable, and a rapidly growing
legal and technical literature has begun to underscore how and why data-
driven algorithms are not automatically unbiased.’ Building from a long-
standing critique of actuarial assessments in criminal justice,’ scholars, civil
society members, and policymakers alike are contending with questions of
bias and accountability,’ competing definitions of fairness within such
algorithms,’ and concerns about the ways in which automated tools may
reinforce underlying societal inequities.’ Research to date tends to focus on
fairness, accountability, and transparency® within the tools, urging
technologists and policymakers to recognize the normative implications of
these technical interventions.’ While questions such as whether these

 

3. For instance, as an April 2019 report by the Partnership on AI emphasizes,
“{a|lthough the use of these [algorithmic risk assessment] tools is in part motivated by the
desire to mitigate existing human fallibility in the criminal justice system, it is a serious
misunderstanding to view tools as objective or neutral simply because they ate based on
data.” Report on Algorithmic Risk Assessment Tools in the U.S. Criminal Justice System,
PARTNERSHIP ON AI 3 (Apr. 2019), https://www.partnershiponai.org/report-on-machine-
learning-in-risk-assessment-tools-in-the-u-s-criminal-justice-system/ [https://perma.cc/
PN9D-68Q5}.

4. See discussion infra notes 15-25.

5. See, eg, Vienna Thompkins, What Are Risk Assessments—and How Do They Advance
Criminal Justice Reform?, BRENNAN Ctr. (Aug. 23, 2018),  https://www.brennan
center.org/blog/what-are-risk-assessments-and-how-do-they-advance-criminal-justice-
reform [https://perma.cc/X8KS-CBCG]; Anna Maria Barry-Jester et al., The New Science of
Sentencing, MARSHALL PROJECT (Aug. 4, 2015, 7:15 AM), https://www.themarshall
project.org/2015/08/04/the-new-science-of-sentencing [https://perma.cc/99KU-Q4NC].

6. For an accessible overview of different technical definitions of fairness, see Arvind
Narayanan, Tyforial: 21 Fairness Definitions and Their Politics, YOUTUBE (Mar. 1, 2018),
ttps://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jLX1uYdnyyk [https://perma.cc/2VGP-M95T].

7. See, eg. Eric Holder, Attorney General Eric Holder Speaks at the National Association of
Criminal Defense Lawyers 57th Annual Meeting and 13th State Criminal Justice Network. Conference,
JusTIcE.GOV (Aug. 1, 2014), https://www.justice.gov/opa/speech/attorney-general-eric-
older-speaks-national-association-criminal-defense-lawyers-57th — [https://perma.cc/9E5C-
MRSZ] (“By basing sentencing decisions on static factors and immutable characteristics . . .
risk assessment tools] may exacerbate unwarranted and unjust disparities that are already far
too common in our criminal justice system and in our society.”).

8. See generally Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAT*), PAT CONF.,
ttps://fatconference.org/index.html [https://perma.cc/8ASD-V9JG] (last visited Sept. 20,
2019).
9. By “normative,” this Article broadly refers to the effect of an intervention on the
common good and the life and liberty of individuals. Cf Laurence Solum, Lega/ Theory
Lexicon: Welfare, Well-Being, and Happiness, LEGAL THEORY BLOG (May 31, 2009),
ttps:/ /lsolum.typepad.com/legaltheory/normative_legal_theory/ {https://perma.cc/
3CGY-F4PQ] (“[A]ny or most of the reasonable views about normative theory agree that
what is good or bad for individual humans is morally salient.”).

 

 

2019] ALGORITHMIC RISK ASSESSMENT 713

determine the risk they posed.’ Congress formally codified this evolution
during the Reagan Administration with the 1984 Federal Bail Reform Act,
which required federal judges to “consider danger to the community in all
cases in setting conditions of release.” States largely followed the federal
government’s lead, marking a national shift in the discourse around tisk
assessment.”

The move towards assessing “dangerousness” goes hand-in-hand with
the ongoing evolution of predictive risk assessment instruments. To date, risk
assessment tools rely on relatively simple machine learning models, such as
logistic regression, and do not yet embrace more complex machine learning
models. Machine learning operates by parsing large datasets to identify
patterns in the data, which allows the development of a predictive function
that can be applied to previously unseen data sets.» The use of an algorithm
might be more standardized than the older clinical assessment based on, say,
the look in the person’s eye. Yet it does not make the predictive enterprise
objective; rather, it turns on a spate of human choices about what data to
use, what statistical model to adopt, how to “tune” the model, and how to
apply the findings.” As more complex machine learning methods are
integrated into risk assessment instruments, it will become even more

 

31. Though beyond the scope of this paper, these developments occurred in tandem
with a “selective incapacitation” movement that focused on detaining the most “dangerous”
defendants. This effort dovetails with many of the objectives of recidivism-based risk
assessment. For an analysis of contemporary lessons for algorithm risk assessment drawn
from the history of selective incapacitation, see Danielle Kehl et al., Algorithms in the Criminal
Justice System: Assessing the Use of Risk Assessments in Sentencing, RESPONSIVE COMMUNITIES
INITIATIVE 3 (2017), http://nrs.harvard.edu/urn-3:HUL.InstRepos:33746041
[https://perma.cc/L7R9-K2W9].

32. United States v. Himler, 797 F.2d 156, 159 (3d Cir. 1986); see also Koepke &
Robinson, Danger Ahead, supra note 13, at 1742.

33. See Koepke & Robinson, Danger Abead, supra note 13, at 1740-41.

34. See id. at 1781 (suggesting that risk assessment is likely to progress from “logistic
regression-based techniques toward more complex machine learning techniques”). Legal
scholarship at times seems to distinguish between “real” machine learning and actuarial
science based on logistic regression and other statistical methods. Rather than advance such
a dichotomy, this Article positions contemporary risk assessment algorithms based on
logistic regression as a simple machine learning model.

35. For discussion of machine learning, see generally VISHAL MAINI & SAMER SABRI,
MACHINE LEARNING FOR HUMANS (2017). In supervised machine learning, the dominant
contemporary method, the data scientist will “tune” different parameters to improve a
selected statistical model’s ability to deliver results that are closer to a predefined goal, or
“objective function.” Id.

36. See discussion supra text accompanying notes 15—18 and sources cited therein.

37. For an overview of the different steps necessary to arrive at a working machine
learning model, see David Lehr & Paul Ohm, Playing with the Data: What Legal Scholars Should
Learn About Machine Learning, 51 U.C. DAVIS L. REV. 653 (2017).

716 BERKELEY TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL __ [Vol. 34:705

include, among others, the risk of data inputs that reproduce and reinforce
racial inequities in the criminal justice system overall; the failure to provide
adequate procedural safeguards, including individualized, adversarial hearings
for all defendants; and the lack of transparency or access to the data or
algorithms used by proprietary instruments.”

These long-simmering issues, moreover, began to boil over into more
general consciousness with a 2016 ProPublica investigation alleging that a
proprietary sentencing algorithm, COMPAS, was systematically unfair in its
treatment of black defendants.** Specifically, ProPublica reported a problem
with “error rate balance”: COMPAS labelled more black defendants who did
not teoffend as “high risk” (false positives) and more white defendants who
did reoffend as low tisk (false negatives). This research was immediately met
with rebuttals” contending that the tool was fair because it exhibited
“predictive parity’: at a given risk level, it predicted a roughly equal
ptoportion of white and black reoffenders.*' In addition to this technical
fairness debate, which turns on how one defines fairness, others lodged
critiques that no opaque, proprietary algorithm could be considered fair to a
ctiminal defendant challenging it.” And still others, including the company
that produced the tool, argued that any problem stemmed from the data

 

47. See A Shared Statement of Civil Rights Concerns, supra note 41. This Article reserves
treatment of due process concerns and questions about whether these algorithms amount to
unlawful preventative detention for separate work.

48. See Julia Angwin et al. Machine Bias, PROPUBLICA (May 23, 2016),
https://www.propublica.org/atticle/machine-bias-tisk-assessments-in-criminal-sentencing
[https://perma.cc/9857-ZXCZ]. For discussion of “the COMPAS debate,” see Eckhouse et
al., Layers of Bias, supra note 10, at 6-7.

49. Angwin et al., Machine Bias, supra note 48.

50. See Sam Corbett-Davies et al., A Computer Program Used for Bail and Sentencing
Decisions was Labeled Biased Against Blacks. It’s Actually Not that Clear., ASH. Post (Oct. 17,
2016), https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/monkey-cage/wp/2016/10/17/can-an-
algorithm-be-racist-our-analysis-is-more-cautious-than-propublicas/ [https://perma.cc/
ZSF4-QUO6k]. But see Julia Angwin & Jeff Larson, ProPublica Responds to Company’s Critique of
Machine Bias Story, PROPUBLICA (July 29, 2016, 11:56 AM), https://www.propublica.org/
article / propublica-responds-to-companys-critique-of-machine-bias-story [https://perma.cc/
5K54-2C2U].

51. See Corbett-Davies et al., A Computer Program Used for Bail and Sentencing Decisions was
Labeled Biased Against Blacks. It’s Actually Not that Clear, supra note 50. For additional
discussion of predictive parity, see supra text accompanying note 6.

52. See, e.g., Matthias Spielkamp, Inspecting Algorithms for Bias, MYT TECH. REV. (June 12,
2017), https://www.technologyreview.com/s/607955/inspecting-algorithms-for-bias/
[https://perma.cc/R6PD-LVCE] (discussing criminal defendant’s argument that “due
process was violated when the judge who sentenced him consulted COMPAS, because the
workings of the system were opaque to the defendant’).

2019] ALGORITHMIC RISK ASSESSMENT 719

is to determine whether PAS in that county consists of “employees of the
coutt, or employees of a public entity contracting with the court for those
setvices.”' Superior courts may opt into a regional consortium or multi-
county PAS with an “adjoining county,” with the limitation that “persons
acting on behalf of the entity, division, or program shall be officers of the
court.”® Moreover, there is local control over who makes up the “coutt,”
which the statute defines to include “ ‘subordinate judicial officers, if
authorized by the particular superior court” in accordance with the California
Constitution and Rules of Court. Superior courts thus call the shots
regarding creation of the PAS as a local institution.*’ This localized control
continues after the creation of the PAS. Each PAS is to report risk
assessment information to the trial court, along with recommended post-trial
conditions of release. These recommendations are non-binding, and each
adjudicating judge retains discretion regarding the final pretrial decision.”

But this local discretion is not open-ended. Creating and using a risk
assessment tool entails political and technical choices. And the decisions that
must be made complicate the local control narrative. More specifically, within
SB 10’s statutory framework, global statutory provisions and statewide Rules
of Court interact with and constrain the available set of local options. The
relevant global actor for SB 10 is the California Judicial Council (Council),
which acts as the “policymaking body” for the California court system. The

 

otherwise provided by statute or federal law. See Superior Courts, CAL. CTS.,
http://www.courts.ca.gov/superiorcourts.htm [https://perma.cc/ M6LX-ASSD}] (last visited
Sept. 21, 2019). The number of judges per superior court varies by the size of the county. Id.

64. Cal. S.B. 10 § 4 (enacted) (adding CAL. PENAL CODE § 1320.7(g)).

65. Id.

66. Id. (adding CAL. PENAL CODE § 1320.7(a)).

67. Earlier versions of the statute called for a statewide oversight body to play a greater
role in creation of the local PAS. See Sandy Uribe, Assembly Committee on Public Safety,
Senate Bill Policy Committee Analysis: SB 10 (Hertzberg), CAL. LEGIS. INFO. 5 (July 11, 2017),
http://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/billAnalysisClient-xhtml?bill_id=201720180SB10
[https://perma.cc/P4GP-487S] (describing an “unnamed agency” that would be authorized
“to oversee pretrial services agencies, to select a statewide pretrial assessment tool, to
develop guidelines, and to provide training and assistance on pretrial release”). References to
the “unnamed agency” and such top-down oversight were eliminated from the statute after
the Chief Probation Officers of California expressed concern that SB 10 would “inhibit|]
local control and flexibility relative to allowing each jurisdiction to determine who will
handle the various parts of the pretrial program .. . at the local level.” Id. at 15. The Judicial
Council also expressed concern at an earlier stage of legislative development that SB 10
“Swould infringe on judicial discretion and independence.” Id. at 13. Subsequent versions of
the statute replaced the proposed “unnamed agency” with the current structure that
combines the Council’s oversight via rulemaking with increased local responsibility to ensure
that the tools satisfy the standards set out in “scientific research.”

68. Cal. S.B. 10 § 4 (enacted) (adding CAL. PENAL CODE § 1320.7(g))

69. See, eg., id. (adding CAL, PENAL CODE §1320.20(f).

732 BERKELEY TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL __ [Vol. 34:705

Department B, 100% of women receive a favorable decision, and seventy-
five percent of men do. Again, there is evidence that men are systematically
less likely to receive the desirable result, even though the outcome is less
skewed. Across the university as a whole, however, Table 4 outlines how
there is complete gender parity, such that global oversight alone would not
reveal any evidence of unfairness.

Table 4. Proportion of individuals who receive positive decision in each subgroup
and respective population size.

 

 

 

 

Proportion Population Size

Women Men Women Men
Dept. A 0.25 0.00 40 20
Dept. B 1.00 0.75 20 40
Combined 0.50 0.50 60 60

 

This effect can also be easily found in real-life data. For instance,
consider the following real-world data on education level and ethnicity from
seven California counties.'”

Table 5. Proportion of individuals with four-year college degree or higher and
population size (in thousands) by county.

 

Proportion Population Size

 

White Asian White Asian

 

 

Fresno 0.30 0.28 219.3 53:3
Lassen 0.16 0.07 15.9 0.3
Marin 0.62 0.59 144.3 11.4
Monterey 0.42 0.36 104.6 16.5
San Mateo 0.56 0.55 236.3 147.8
Sutter 0.22 0.21 33.0 92
Tuolumne 0.22 0.11 34.2 0.3
Combined 0.44 0.47 787.6 238.8

 

 

109. This data covers 2011-2015 and relies on figures made available by the California
Department of Public Health. See Edwcational Attainment, CHHS OPEN DATA,
https: //data.chhs.ca.gov/dataset/educational-attainment _ [https://perma.cc/YCL8-PHG7]|
(last visited Sept. 23, 2019).

736 BERKELEY TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL __ [Vol. 34:705

This thresholding consideration emerges in a tisk assessment policy that
applies a global risk threshold across local jurisdictions—including
application of the same threshold to subpopulations in a given jurisdiction.'’
Suppose a county consists of two ethnic groups, Green and Blue, and adopts
a tisk assessment tool whose scores for the Green and Blue groups are each
normally distributed with mean 0.5 and 0.6, respectively, with standard
deviation 0.1, as depicted in the following figure:

Figure 1. Score distribution of Green and Blue groups: different mean.

 

0 0.2 0.4 0.6 ° 0.8 1

Imagine, further, that this tool has reached some agreed-upon balance of
fairness and accuracy. Distributional discrepancy within the jurisdiction can
still give rise to thresholding challenges. Recall that, under SB 10, risk refers
to the “likelihood that a person will not appear in court as required or the
likelihood that a person will commit a new crime if the person is released
before adjudication of his or her current criminal offense.”''’ Applying this
understanding, suppose that the statewide Council decides to categorize
individuals with risk higher than 0.7 as the high risk group, indicated by the
highlighted areas in Figure 1.

How might the state’s global choice affect a given county and the
individuals within it to whom the tool is applied? Applying the scenario
described above, among the Green individuals who would neither recidivate
nor miss the court date, roughly one percent will be classified as high risk.
On the other hand, this number is significantly larger—ten percent—for the
Blue group. That is, a Blue individual who poses no tisk is ten times more
likely to be classified high-risk than they would have been if they had they

 

116. If each sub-jurisdiction sets its own risk threshold levels by determining what
quantitative scores are associated with low, medium, and high risk categories, then the
understanding of “risk” would be localized, without global consensus of the sort law
typically demands.

117. S.B. 10, 2017-2018 Leg., Reg. Sess. § 1320.7(h) (Cal. 2018) (enacted) (codified at
CAL. GOV’l CODE § 27771 and scattered sections of CAL. PENAL CODE).

 

 

2019] ALGORITHMIC RISK ASSESSMENT 711

and sentencing determinations, “clinical prediction,’ or “the largely
unstructured clinical judgment of skilled practitioners,” was used to assess
the likelihood of recidivism.'’ Outside of the parole or pretrial context,
moreover, police officers and agencies have long made choices about where
to allocate limited resources based on risk assessment,'® which is an
inherently predictive enterprise.

Two significant types of changes occurred in the back half of the
twentieth century. One significant shift was methodological. In the 1960s and
1970s, a growing sense that clinical predictions were unfairly subjective and
hence susceptible to improper bias catalyzed evidence-based interventions.”
The resulting tools were “actuarial”? Rather than relying on subjective
expertise, these actuarial tools invoked statistics to “assign a quantitative risk
score to an offender by assessing unalterable (e.g., static) individual factors
(ie., history of substance abuse and age at first offense) that have been
statistically linked to the risk of recidivism in correctional populations and
based on research involving large population samples.” In contrast to the
paradigm shift from subjective to actuarial tools, subsequent developments
have been more evolutionary. Over time, a third generation of statistical tools
expanded beyond “static risk factors (such as criminal history, age, and
gender)” to consider risks, needs, and “both static and dynamic risk factors
such as educational status [and] employment.””* As Kelly Hannah-Moffat
explains, tools that rely on more dynamic factors are distinct because they

 

MARVIN E, FRANKEL, CRIMINAL SENTENCES: LAW WITHOUT ORDER (1973)); see also
BERNARD HARCOURT, AGAINST PREDICTION, 7—18 (2007) (discussing parole boards’ use of
risk assessment instruments since the 1920s).

17. Kelly Hannah-Moffat, Actuarial Sentencing: An “Unsettled” Proposition, 30 JUSY. Q. 270,
274 (2013).

18. This Article adopts a common definition of risk assessment: “the process of using
risk factors [factors that precede and statistically correlate with recidivism] to estimate the
likelihood (i.e., probability) of an outcome occurring in a population.” See Garrett &
Monahan, Judging Risk, supra note 11 (manuscript at 7) (citing CARNEGIE COMM’N ON SCL,
TECH., & GOv’r, RISK AND THE ENVIRONMENT: IMPROVING REGULATORY DECISION
MAKING (1993)).

19. For discussion of studies reporting bias in human judgment, see Eckhouse et al.,
Layers of Bias, supra note 10, at 17-18.

20. As used here, “actuarial” refers broadly to empirically informed assessments, and
thus contrasts with judgments based only on professionals’ clinical decisions. Cf NATHAN
JAMES, CONG. RESEARCH SERV., R44087, RISK AND NEEDS ASSESSMENT IN THE FEDERAL
PRISON SYSTEM 10 (2018) (“[I]t is argued that utilizing actuarial rather than clinical (ie.,
professional judgment alone) risk assessment makes the process more objective and less
susceptible to rater bias.”).

21. Hannah-Moffat, Actuarial Sentencing: An “Unsettled” Proposition, supra note 17, at 274.
For a discussion of static tools’ limitations, see éd.

22. Garrett & Monahan, Judging Risk, supra note 11 (manuscript at 10); see also Hannah-
Moffat, supra note 17, at 274-77.

 

THE INSTITUTIONAL LIFE OF ALGORITHMIC RISK
ASSESSMENT
Alicia Solow-Niederman, YooJung Choi & Guy Van den Broeck'**

ABSTRACT

As states nationwide turn to risk assessment algorithms as tools for criminal justice
reform, scholars and civil society actors alike are increasingly warning that this technological
turn comes with complications. Research to date tends to focus on fairness, accountability,
and transparency within algorithmic tools. Although attention to whether these instruments
are fair or biased is normatively essential, this Article contends that this inquiry cannot be the
whole conversation. Looking at issues such as fairness or bias in a tool in isolation elides
vital bigger-picture considerations about the institutions and political systems within which
tools are developed and deployed. Using California’s Money Bail Reform Act of 2017 (SB
10) as an example, this Article analyzes how risk assessment statutes create frameworks
within which policymakers and technical actors are constrained and empowered when it
comes to the design and implementation of a particular instrument. Specifically, it focuses on
the tension between, on one hand, a top-down, global understanding of fairness, accuracy,
and lack of bias, and, on the other, a tool that is well-tailored to local considerations. It
explores three potential technical and associated policy consequences of SB 10’s framework:
proxies, Simpson’s paradox, and thresholding. And it calls for greater attention to the design
of risk assessment statutes and their allocation of global and local authority.

 

DOL: https://doi.org/10.15779/Z38WD3Q226
© 2019 Alicia Solow-Niederman, YooJung Choi & Guy Van den Broeck.

Jt 2017-19 PULSE Fellow, UCLA School of Law and 2019-20 Law Clerk, U.S.
District Court for the District of Columbia. Alicia Solow-Niederman completed this work
during her tenure as a PULSE Fellow, and the arguments advanced here ate made in her
personal capacity.

tr Ph.D Student, UCLA, Department of Computer Science.

Trt Assistant Professor and Samueli Fellow, UCLA Department of Computer Science.
The authors are grateful to participants at the 2019 We Robot Conference and the March
2019 PULSE Workshop on AI and Law Enforcement. Thanks also to Solon Barocas, Chris
Bavitz, Kristian Lum, Deirdre Mulligan, Richard Re, and the members of the UC Berkeley
Algorithmic Fairness & Opacity Working Group for thoughtful comments and helpful
conversations. This work is partially supported by NSF grants HIS-1657613, HS-1633857,
and CCF-1837129. Finally, many thanks to the editors of the Berkeley Technology Law Journal.

706 BERKELEY TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL __ [Vol. 34:705

TABLE OF CONTENTS

I. INTRODUCTION .......cccccecssessseseeeseeeeeseeseeeeeeseeeeescseseeseeeeseeeseeeseees
II, RISK. ASSESSMENT TOOLS visscssssssssssssssssssssssssscsssvvensvenvesevescvassesisese

 

A. ACTUARIAL JUSTICE: A BRIEF HISTORY
B. ALGORITHMIC RISK ASSESSMENT: A RECENT HISTOR’

TII. SB 10’S STATUTORY STRUCTURE ......cccccccscssssessssssssssosssssssessensseace 718
IV. ALGORITHMIC RISK ASSESSMENT IN PRACTICE:
POTENTIAL CONSEQUENCES OF THE SB 10 FRAMEWORK. 724

A. PROXIES woes
Bi SIMPSON’S PARADOX.
G ‘THRESHOLDING..

 
  

 
 
 

Va PATHS FORWARD ssccscncsscvssscesccescescsescsessvsnssvevsswsevesnoveneveaavecavecsaassss 740
VI. CONCLUSION 10... cecccccceesseseeseeeseseeesesceesseeeseseseseesesesesesseseseeeseeeasens 743

I. INTRODUCTION

On August 28, 2018, California passed the California Money Bail Reform
Act, also known as Senate Bill 10 (SB 10), and eliminated the state’s system
of money bail. Lauded by politicians as a “transformative” measure,’ SB 10
aimed to deploy algorithmic pretrial risk assessment to combat
socioeconomic disparities in the criminal justice system. But even groups that
have long supported criminal justice reform criticized SB 10’s final text,
raising concerns about an “overly broad presumption of preventative
detention” that compromised due process and racial justice.? Whether or not
it makes sense to eliminate money bail is a policy decision beyond the scope
of this Article. Still, any such policy decision must account for the fact that
algorithmic pretrial assessments ate not an objective substitute for subjective
human considerations.

 

1. See Governor Brown Signs Legislation to Revamp California’s Bail System, CA.GOV (Aug.
28, 2018), https://www.ca.gov/archive/gov39/2018/08/28/governor-brown-signs-
legislation-to-revamp-californias-bail-system-protect-public-safety/index.html
[https://perma.cc/772Z-YJ6C] (quoting California State Chief Justice Tani Cantil-Sakauye)
(“This is a transformative day for our justice system. Our old system of money bail was
outdated, unsafe, and unfair.”); see also id. (quoting former Governor Jerry Brown) (“Today,
California reforms its bail system so that rich and poor alike are treated fairly.”).

2. ACLU of California Changes Position to Oppose Bail Reform Legislation, ACLU (Aug. 20,
2018), https://www.aclusocal.org/en/press-releases/aclu-california-changes-position-
oppose-bail-reform-legislation [https://perma.cc/9MEP-9D XW].

2019] ALGORITHMIC RISK ASSESSMENT 737

been in the Green group. Formally, the false positive rates of Green and Blue
groups do not match, and the categorization would be considered unfair
under this notion of fairness. In fact, in order to achieve equal false positive
rates using a single threshold, we need either to classify everyone as high risk,
using a threshold very close to 0, or no one as high risk, using a threshold
very close to 1.

Nevertheless, we could still achieve a fair thresholding rule by setting a
different threshold for each ethnic group. For instance, thresholding the
Green individuals at 0.65 and Blue at 0.74 would achieve fairness with equal
false positive rates of four percent. In policy terms, this would require more
particularized, variable thresholding wthin a given population. But this intra-
population thresholding comes at a cost: there is a tradeoff between global
uniformity and localized fairness at the level of subpopulations.

Furthermore, this sort of thresholding problem can persist even when
the base distributions of different subgroups are identical, due to uncertainty
inherent in any statistically-derived risk assessment instrument. Consider a
different hypothetical county with Green and Blue ethnic groups. Risk scores
for both groups in this county are identically distributed and centered around
0.5. Suppose an algorithmic scoring system outputs a risk score with more
variance for the Green group than for the Blue group. More precisely, the
predicted risk scores have standard deviation 0.2 for Green and 0.05 for
Blue, as shown in the below figure:

Figure 2. Score distribution of Green and Blue groups: different variance.

0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1

Such a phenomenon can often occur when one group, in this case Green,
makes up a greater proportion of the population. Because algorithmic
instruments are built to optimize a measure for the overall population, they
will perform better for a group that makes up a greater proportion. Put
differently, the tool will have a better predictive power for the majority
group. Such a tool can be considered fair in the sense that the scores are

718 BERKELEY TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL __ [Vol. 34:705

Garrett and Jonathan Monahan have also raised constitutional questions
involving judges’ actual use of tisk assessment algorithms, noting unsettled
due process questions when a judge’s determination is “informed by
quantitative tisk assessment methods.” As Garrett and Monahan
acknowledge,” and as Megan Stevenson contends in another recent piece,”
despite a bevy of theoretical concern about the use of these algorithmic tools,
there is an extremely limited literature on their adoption in practice.

There is not only a lack of empirical evidence about the use of
algorithmic tools on the ground, but also even less sustained attention to the
design of statutes and regulations and the associated protocols, norms, and
institutions within which risk assessment instruments are developed and
deployed. This Article provides the first in-depth evaluation of ways in which
choices about how to craft a policy and how to allocate discretion and
authority within new and preexisting institutions inform both the theory and
practice of algorithmic risk assessment.

Il. SB10’S STATUTORY STRUCTURE

This Part surveys SB 10 to illustrate how policymakers’ choices about
how to design risk assessment statutes in turn affect the creation and
implementation of particular risk assessment instruments. It focuses on
portions of SB 10 that grant authority and discretion to state and local actors,
respectively.’ This overview provides a foundation for Part IV’s analysis of
the specific policy and technical consequences of SB 10’s_ statutory
framework.

On its face, SB 10 grants local courts considerable discretion over the
creation and implementation of the risk assessment instrument. The statute
provides that local “Pretrial Assessment Services” (PAS) are responsible for
pretrial risk level assessment of individuals who have been charged with a
ctime.” Each “particular superior court,” which operates at the county level,”

 

 

58. Garrett & Monahan, Judging Risk, supra note 11, at 1-2.

59. See id. at 15-16.

60. See Stevenson, Assessing Risk Assessment, supra note 10, at 305-06.

61. This Article integrates proposed rules that California’s Judicial Council has already
published. Though it is possible that additional rules might have clarified ambiguities such as
precisely what validation requires, they remain unresolved for the foreseeable future because
further rule development is stayed pending the 2020 referendum. See supra note 12.
Assumptions or inferences drawn from the available text are noted in line.

62. See S.B. 10, 2017-2018 Leg., Reg. Sess. §§ 1320.26(a), 1320.7(f), 1320.7(g) (Cal.
2018) (enacted) (codified at CAL. GOV’r CODE § 27771 and scattered sections of CAL.
PENAL CODE).

63. There are 58 trial courts in California, one per county, known as superior courts.
These courts have general jurisdiction over all state civil and criminal matters, unless

708 BERKELEY TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL __ [Vol. 34:705

instruments ate fair or biased are normatively essential, this Article contends
that they cannot be the whole conversation. Automated risk assessment
systems are not sterile tools that operate in a vacuum; rather, they are
dynamic, norm-laden interventions that must be deployed within complex
webs of new and preexisting policy requirements as well as legal institutions,
rules, and associated social practices.” Accordingly, looking at issues such as
fairness or bias in a tool in isolation elides vital bigger-picture considerations
about the institutions and political systems within which tools are developed
and deployed."

Although SB 10 has been stayed pending a 2020 ballot referendum,” its
statutory framework offers a real-world example of the political, legal, and

 

10. A growing number of nonprofit entities and academics recognize this point. See,
e.g., Report on Algorithmic Risk Assessment Tools in the U.S. Criminal Justice System, supra note 3, at
3 (articulating risk assessment challenges at three levels: “1. Concerns about the validity,
accuracy, and bias in the tools themselves; 2. Issues with the interface between the tools and
the humans who interact with them; and 3. Questions of governance, transparency, and
accountability”); Laurel Eckhouse et al., Layers of Bias: A Unified Approach for Understanding
Problems with Risk Assessment, 46 CRIM. JUST. & BEHAV. 185, 205 (2019) [hereinafter
Eckhouse et al., Layers of Bias] (offering a framework to assess “layers of bias” in algorithmic
risk assessment and emphasizing that every layer requires “human judgment about what
fairness means”); Megan 'T. Stevenson, Assessing Risk Assessment in Action, 3 MINN. L. REV.
303, 306, 317 (2018) [hereinafter Stevenson, Assessing Risk Assessment| (anderscoring “people
and design choices” behind risk assessment and describing decisions about predicting risk,
selecting a risk prediction algorithm, and dividing groups into classification levels as “choices
that depend, at least partially, on the normative and legal landscape”); Jessica M. Eaglin,
Constructing Recidivism Risk, 67 EMORY L.J. 59, 61 (2017) (examining “normative judgments
entailed in the development of predictive recidivism risk information”).

11. Legal scholars have recently decried a lack of concrete evidence about tisk
assessment tools’ efficacy and called for a more practical, empirically informed approach to
evaluating tisk assessment algorithms. See Stevenson, Assessing Risk Assessment, supra note 10,
at 305-06; Brandon L. Garrett & John Monahan, Judging Risk, 108 CALIF. L. REV.
(forthcoming 2019), https://ssrn.com/abstract=3190403 (manuscript at 30) [hereinafter
Garrett & Monahan, Judging Risk| (“[FJat more attention must be paid to the structure of
decisionmaking that is supposed to be informed by risk assessment.”). This Article concurs
that attention to real-world outcomes, and not merely abstract risks, is imperative. It begins
its human- and design-focused analysis one level up from the risk assessment tools
themselves. This Article is the first account to evaluate the ways in which legislative choices
about a risk assessment regime create a particular institutional context within which tools
operate—and how this institutional context in turn structures the affordances and limitations
of the tools.

12. SB 10 was temporarily stayed after a coalition of bail bond industry groups engaged
the state’s direct democracy system and placed a referendum on SB 10 on California’s 2020
ballot. See SB 10: Pretrial Release and Detention, CAL. C1S., https://www.courts.ca.gov/
pretrial.htm [https://perma.cc/3ZZF-GF5N] (last visited Sept. 20, 2019); see also Jazmine
Ulloa, Bail Bond Industry Moves to Block Sweeping California Law, Submitting Signatures for a 2020
Ballot Referendum, LA TIMES (Noy. 20, 2018, 4:05 PM), https://www.latimes.com/politics /la-
pol-ca-bail-referendum-signatures-20181120-story.html [https://perma.cc/QS93-8BZL].

2019] ALGORITHMIC RISK ASSESSMENT 729

from using race as a feature and also bar the consideration of proxies that
might correlate with race, such as zip codes. However, they make different
choices about what constitutes an unacceptable proxy. Each county makes
these decisions based on the following hypothetical distribution in which
white individuals are more likely to have a high school diploma than black
individuals (sixty percent vs. forty percent), such that education level is
correlated with race:

Table 1. Proportionate size and high school completion rate per racial group.

 

 

 

Proportion of :
Population H.S. Diploma
White 0.5 0.6
Black 0.5 0.4

 

 

Based on this finding, County A bars the use of education level in the
tool. On the other hand, County B does not require that the tool be
completely independent of an individual’s education level, on the grounds
that it provides salient information about the risk that an individual poses.
Lastly, County C permits the use of race as a feature—but the local PAS that
administers the tool stipulates that it can only be used to correct for possible
inadvertent bias from proxies. In other words, County C explicitly attempts
to use race to achieve demographic parity, whereas the other counties bar the
use of tace or proxies for race. What happens when each county’s tool is
applied to a demographically identical individual?

The result varies by county. First, take County A. Recall that County A
does not permit the use of race or education level as a feature. The tool it
uses thus outputs scores such that 0.5 of the defendants are detained, at the
average risk rate of the entire population, regardless of their race or
education level,'”° as summarized in the following table:

 

basis of a suspect classification like race or national origin, and that there is no explicit racial
animus that could establish a federal constitutional violation under Washington v. Davis and its
progeny. A state actor might nonetheless decide to avoid the use of a particular characteristic
like race or gender. At least one recently-enacted statute presently takes a hardline approach
of this sort and bans consideration of gender. See Ann Carrns, In California, Gender Can No
Longer Be Considered in Setting Car Insurance Rates, NY ‘TIMES (Jan. 18. 2019),
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/01/18/your-money/car-insurance-gender-california.html
{https://perma.cc/IAKK-U9PD] (quoting California Insurance Department: “ ‘Gender’s
relationship to risk of loss no longer appears to be substantial,’ the department noted, saying
the rationale for using it was ‘suspect’ ”).

106. For the sake of simplicity and clarity, we assume here that the risk assessment tool
itself makes a decision whether to detain or release a defendant. In practice, the tool outputs

2019] ALGORITHMIC RISK ASSESSMENT 723

tisk, there are global rules.’ Where PAS concludes that an individual is
medium-risk, however, it is to recommend their release or detention
according to “standards set forth in the local rule of court.” SB 10 provides
in subsequent text that each superior coutt is to set these local rules of court
“in consultation with [PAS] and other stakeholders.’ The statute
additionally authorizes local rules that “expand the list of exclusions for
persons assessed as medium risk that [PAS] is not permitted to release,” so
long as some medium risk individuals are still released.*° Apart from this
requirement, the local courts ate constrained only by the requirement that
local rules are “consistent” with the Council’s global rules of court.”

Though the relevant Council rules are in stasis for the foreseeable
future,” the draft versions do not offer much more concrete guidance to
superior courts. Draft Rule 4.40 provides that “[e]ach local rule must
authorize release for as many arrested persons as possible, while reasonably
assuring public safety and appearance in court as required.” Without more,
however, these goals of “public safety” and “appearance in court” may not
amply guide or constrain local actors. As Human Rights Watch warns in its

 

misdemeanors or felonies who fall within the exclusions listed in

section 1320.10(e). (Pen. Code, § 1320.10(b).)

e Medium risk: Pretrial Assessment Services has authority to
release on own recognizance or supervised own recognizance, or
detain prearraignment, except for those persons subject to one
of the exclusions listed in section 1320.10(e) or additional
exclusions that may be included by a local court rule. (Pen. Code,

§ 1320.10(c).)

e = High risk: Pretrial Assessment Services—and the coutt, if the
coutt provides prearraignment review—is not authorized to
release persons assessed as “high risk.” Under sections
1320.10(e) and 1320.13(b), these persons must be held until
arraignment when the court will make a release determination
and set conditions of release, if applicable.
Criminal Procedure: Proper Use of Pretrial Risk Assessment Information; Review and Release Standards
for Pretrial Assessment Services for Persons Assessed as Medium Risk, CAL. Crs. 2 (2018),

https://www.courts.ca.gov/documents/SP18-23.pdf [https://perma.cc/77EA-G2UR]
(internal citations omitted) [hereinafter Proposed Rules 4.10 & 4.40].
83. See id.

84. Cal. S.B. 10 § 4 (enacted) (adding CAL. PENAL CODE § 1320.10).

85. See id. (adding CAL. PENAL CODE § 1320.11(a)).

86. See id.; see also Proposed Rules 4.10 > 4.40, supra note 82, at 13 (“If a court chooses to
add to the list of exclusionary offenses or factors, the court must not adopt a rule that
includes exclusions that effectively exclude all or nearly all persons assessed as medium risk
from prearraignment release.”’).

87. Cal. S.B. 10 § 4 (enacted) (adding CAL. PENAL CODE § 1320.11 (a)).

88. See supra note 12.

89. Proposed Rules 4.10 ¢& 4.40, supra note 82, at 13.

728 BERKELEY TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL __ [Vol. 34:705

adaptation of a tool that is on the approved list.""’ Under this structure, each
local superior court remains responsible for validating the risk assessment
instrument used in its respective county.

To see how this allocation of authority might operate, consider applying
SB 10’s structure to a hypothetical state of Idem, made up of Counties A, B,
and C. The counties are identically distributed for all observable measures."”
They begin with the same risk assessment tool, selected from the list that
Idem’s statewide council has provided. Assume further that the counties are
able to tweak the preapproved tool during the validation process.'’ They
each proceed to validate and adapt the instrument, with an eye to ensuring it
does not unfairly classify on the basis of the protected characteristic of race,
as the statute requires.

Suppose County A and County B, when acting in good faith to comply
with the state’s requirement to avoid unfair classification when applying this
tool, are each concerned that the use of any racial information at all is
ptoblematic.'”° They therefore decide to forbid risk assessment algorithms

 

102. These validation guidelines were not completed before the statute was stayed. See
sources cited spra note 13 and accompanying text.

103. Here, observable refers both to demographic characteristics and available
information, such as past criminal history.

104. Again, this point is ambiguous on the face of SB 10 without more explicit rules
regarding validation, which are not yet published. This assumption nonetheless illustrates
how the very choice of where and in what ways to permit validation, globally or locally, is a
policy decision with technical implications that tend to be underexplored at the policy design
stage.

105. County A’s concern could apply even if the officials are not acting with
discriminatory purpose such that the U.S. Constitution’s Equal Protection Clause would bar
the consideration of race. As Sam Corbett-Davies and Sharad Goel explain:

[T]he dominant legal doctrine of discrimination focuses on a decision

maker’s motivations. Specifically, equal protection law—as established by

the U.S. Constitution’s Fourteenth Amendment—prohibits government

agents from acting with ‘discriminatory purpose’ (Washington v. Davis,

1976). It bars policies undertaken with animus (i.e., it bars a form of taste-

based discrimination, since acting with animus typically means sacrificing

utility); but it allows for the limited use of protected attributes to further a

compelling government interest (i.e, it allows a form of statistical

discrimination).
Sam Corbett-Davies & Sharad Goel, The Measure and Mismeasure of Fairness: A Critical Review of
Fair Machine Learning, ARXIV 4 (Aug. 14, 2018), https://arxiv.org/abs/1808.00023
[https://perma.cc/CG8B-WNZ]]; of Aziz Z. Huq, Racial Equity in Algorithmic Criminal Justice,
68 DUKE LJ. 1043, 1053 (2019) (articulating limitations of “equal protection jurisprudence
in relation to algorithmic criminal justice” and offering that this jurisprudence “is not a
coherent or morally acute metric”). For purposes of the above hypothetical, assume that
there is no applicable federal statutory regime that supports a disparate impact analysis, that
the state constitution does not outright bar discrimination or preferential treatment on the

 

2019] ALGORITHMIC RISK ASSESSMENT 709

statistical tradeoffs inherent in risk assessment statutes. This Article’s detailed
analysis of SB 10 focuses on a tension between, on the one hand, a top-
down, global understanding of fairness, accuracy, and lack of bias, and, on the
other hand, a tool that is well-tailored to /xca/ considerations. Anytime there is
both a more centralized body that sets overarching guidelines about the tool
and a tisk assessment algorithm that must be tailored to reflect local
jurisdictional conditions, as we will see is the case in SB 10, there will be a
global-local tension. For instance, the pursuit of a single, statewide
understanding of a first principle like non-discrimination—as consistency
and tule of law might demand—trequires technical tradeoffs in the fairness
and accuracy of the tool. Risk assessment tools must be validated with
reference to the particular conditions of application.’ Yet such validation of
a tool to make it more fair or accurate at a local level—as technological best
practices demand—can produce different ground-level understandings of
what fairness and accuracy require. And this local variability is in tension with
a top-down, global understanding of the normative principle. In practice, any
attempt to protect a normative principle within an algorithmic tool must be
operationalized within the system of algorithmic federalism that we create each
time a jurisdiction (typically a state) adopts tisk assessment and then deploys
the associated algorithmic risk assessment tool in its sub-jurisdictions
(typically counties) that are responsible for discrete policy and technical steps
in the instrument’s creation and use."

 

13. See, e.g, PAMELA M. CASEY ET AL., OFFENDER RISK & NEEDS ASSESSMENT
INSTRUMENTS: A PRIMER FOR CouRTS 21 (2014) (“A local validation study will (a) inform
any modifications that must be made to the content of the tool to optimize predictive
validity in the local jurisdiction and ensure that it meets basic minimum scientific standards,
and (b) inform the development of appropriate cutoff values for categorizing offenders into
different risk levels.”); Garrett & Monahan, Judging Risk, supra note 11 (manuscript at 40)
(“Instruments should be re-validated over time, at reasonable intervals, and with attention to
local variation in populations, resources, and crime patterns.”) (internal citation omitted);
John Logan Koepke & David G. Robinson, Danger Ahead: Risk Assessment and The Future of
Bail Reform, 93 WASH. L. REV. 1725, 1757 (2018) [hereinafter Koepke & Robinson, Danger
Abead| (“For tools to make well-calibrated predictions from the start, they need to be trained
on data that matches the conditions about which they are making predictions.”).

14, Immense thanks to Kiel Brennan-Marquez for suggesting this term during an early
presentation of this project. Akin to other federated decision-making bodies, “algorithmic
federalism” refers to algorithmic systems that feature jurisdiction-wide authority over
algorithmic policy but also include substantial space for regional or local bodies to
accomplish whatever objective the algorithmic policy intervention seeks. For instance, SB 10
features both a statewide policy authority and county-wide bodies responsible for managing
large portions of the technical implementation and contending with the policy outcomes. In
future work (tentatively titled Algorithmic Localism), Alicia Solow-Niederman intends to apply
existing scholarship on federalism and localism to explore local and global tensions, with an
eye to the costs and benefits of allocating decision-making authority and discretion at
different levels.

2019] ALGORITHMIC RISK ASSESSMENT 715

alone, “[nJine states enacted laws allowing or requiring courts to use tisk
assessments to assist in establishing bail and release conditions. Another five
passed bills directing studies or development of risk assessment tools.”
These enactments are, moreover, the latest in a longer-running series of state
statutes that use these tools: “Since 2012, 20 laws in 14 states created or
regulated the use of risk assessments during the pretrial process. In 2014
alone, 11 laws were passed to regulate how risk assessment tools ate used to
help determine whether, and under what conditions, a defendant should be
released.”

Significantly, these enactments represent more than updates to technical
instruments in order to keep up with the Joneses. There is also an underlying
policy narrative. Like earlier historic shifts, these policies reflect a belief that
more sophisticated algorithmic risk analysis tools can better account for
individual defendant characteristics, rather than making a blanket choice to
detain or release an individual based on their alleged charges.“* And
continuing debates that date to at least the 1960s, much of the discussion
involves broader questions about the role of bail or non-monetary
restrictions, as well as how these choices interact with fundamental rights and
civil liberties. For instance, prior to California’s elimination of money bail
with SB 10, a 2017 New Jersey state statute changed New Jersey’s money bail
system to provide judges with algorithmic risk assessment scores, aiming to
“build a better, fairer[,] and safer system of criminal justice.”

This apparent state enthusiasm for algorithmic solutions, however, has
met mounting public and scholarly debate about the ethical and legal
propriety of these tools. For instance, over a hundred civil society
organizations recently signed and adopted a statement of civil rights

concerns.” As this document details, concerns about the use of such tools

 

by an accused person’s counsel. The design and structure of such tools must be transparent
and accessible to the public.”).

42. Trends in Pretrial Release: State Legislation Update Civil and Criminal Justice, supra note 40,
at 1.

43. Amber Widgery, Trends in Pretrial Release: State Legislation 1, NCSL (Mar. 2015),
http://www.ncsl.org/portals/1/ImageLibrary/WebImages/Criminal%20Justice/ NCSL%
20pretrialrends_w05.pdf [https://perma.cc/7NM6-846B].

44. See id.

45. See Stuart Rabner, Chief Justice: Bail Reform Puts N.J. at the Forefront of Fairness,
NJ.coM (Jan. 9, 2017, 9:33 AM), https://www.njcourts.gov/courts/assets/criminal/
starledgercolumn.pdf [https://perma.cc/T9PK-LZV8].

46. A Shared Statement of Civil Rights Concerns, supra note 41; see also More than 100 Civil
Rights, Digital Justice, and Community-Based Organizations Raise Concerns About Pretrial Risk
Assessment, LEADERSHIP CONF. ON Civ. & HuM. Ris. (july 30, 2018),
https:/ /civilrights.org/2018/07/30/more-than-100-civil-rights-digital-justice-and-
community-based-organizations-taise-concerns-about-pretrial-risk-assessment/
[https://perma.cc/M7V2-8X9P].

2019] ALGORITHMIC RISK ASSESSMENT 725

not contain an explicit discussion on how to handle the proxy problem. As
we will see, this issue is likely to atise in risk assessment statutes more
generally because neither local discretion nor a more centralized policy
provides a complete solution.

The second category, Simpson’s paradox, is a phenomenon in which the
existence or the direction of a statistical trend differs between a global
population (e.g., state) and its local sub-populations (e.g., counties). This
issue is particularly acute in a statutory framework like SB 10, which relies on
allocation of authority across both the global and local levels.

The final category, thresholding, refers to the process of setting
qualitative risk levels associated with particular quantitative risk scores. SB 10
outlines a process in which the scores from a risk assessment tool are
thresholded to group defendants into low, medium, and high risk levels, with
associated policy outcomes. The policy rub is that thresholding can lead to
unfair categorizations even when using scores that the relevant authority has
deemed unbiased, especially where different protected groups are
geographically concentrated or dispersed in different areas.

As the remainder of this Part reveals, a statutory framework like SB 10
matters because it will affect how each of these technical challenges arise and
shape the available solution set.

A. PROXIES

As a policy matter, SB 10 and the publicly available draft rules address
fairness both globally and locally.”' Globally, the California Board of State
and Community Corrections is to contract with independent third parties to
assess the statute’s effects with an emphasis on “the impact of the act by
race, ethnicity, gender, and income level.””’ Locally, the implementing court
is to “consider any limitations of risk assessment tools in general, and any
limitations of the particular risk assessment tool used by [PAS], including .. .
[w]hether any scientific research has raised questions that the particular
instrument unfairly classifies offenders based on race, ethnicity, gender, or
income level.”

Since the global requirements refer to independent audits, this Section
emphasizes local fairness oversight: What might local consideration of risk
assessment limitations requite, and what research might be relevant to
determine whether there has been unfair classification? The answer turns on
technical design decisions about what kinds of information a tool can take
into account. Suppose that a risk assessment instrument eliminates any use of

 

91. This analysis reflects rules made publicly available as of late May 2019.
92. Cal. S.B. 10 § 4 (enacted) (adding CAL. PENAL CODE § 1320.30(a)).
93. Proposed Rules 4.10 ¢& 4.40, supra note 82, at 11-12.

734 BERKELEY TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL __ [Vol. 34:705

unacceptable. Alternatively, it could be accepted on the grounds that the 0.03
difference between the white and Asian population in being classified as low
tisk is negligible. Each of these conclusions is a normatively-laden policy
determination, embedded in the auditing process, that merits explicit, ex ante
consideration by scholars and policymakers.

Critically, even in a world where there exists global consensus on what
represents an acceptable difference across demographic groups, Simpson’s
paradox remains at the county level. In the case of the seven California
counties, for instance, a tool deemed globally fair would in fact be biased
against Asians in every one of the counties. To see how, return to the
hypothetical tool E described above, for which achieving a four-year degree
mediates the quantitative risk assessment level and results in a low risk label.
Applying such a tool to counties with the above demographics, Asians would
receive comparatively higher risk scores than whites within each of the
counties. Furthermore, such discrimination can be much mote significant
than the 0.03 difference observed at the state level. As the above chart
illustrates, in Tuolumne for instance, white individuals are twice as likely to
be in the low-risk group than Asian individuals. Accordingly, different local
and global parsing of the same data set can make even the same outcomes
seem fair or unfair, depending on which vantage point is adopted.

The existence of Simpson’s paradox thus provides a hefty challenge to
SB 10’s validation process. While the counties are responsible for developing
fair risk assessment tools at the county level, the state must also validate each
tool. If the state chooses to validate tools using statewide aggregated data,
then Simpson’s paradox may mean that the evaluation of a tool’s fairness at
the state level differs from the evaluation of that same tool at the county
level. On the other hand, the state’s validation of a tool for each individual
county is not only expensive, but also an oxymoron if the idea is a
centralized, uniform validation process set forth at the state level. Moreover,
Simpson’s paradox can interact with, and further complicate, the proxy issues
described previously. In particular, determining whether a feature is a proxy
for a protected attribute involves measuring the statistical correlation, which
may hide itself or even reverse direction at the state level as opposed to
county level, and vice versa. There is no panacea for these global-local
challenges. The only palliative is more awareness and intentionality in making
initial choices about which authority is responsible for which steps, along
with greater upfront specification about who is to make determinations at
which points in the process.

C. THRESHOLDING

Specific policy provisions within SB 10 also carry unrecognized
technical—and human—consequences. Recall that the statute requires the

742 BERKELEY TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL __ [Vol. 34:705

locally validated tools and be careful in calling for preapproval of tools that
are removed from a particular local context.

Audit with Attention to Local and Global Detail. Several of the technical
challenges—most notably Simpson’s paradox—that arise in SB 10 occur
because of a lack of adequate attention to local data. For example, ex post
auditing at the global level alone could fail to identify local treatment of a
particular subpopulation that is unfair as compared to the treatment of other
demographic groups in that locality.” When it comes to auditing the way
that a tool classifies individuals, aggregated data is not enough. Audits must
take into account localized data, not merely aggregate data. Though doing so
is more cost- and time-intensive, this allocation of resources must be made
before deploying the tool, as part of the initial cost-benefit analysis of a turn
to tisk assessment algorithms.

Mixed Zones are a Mixed Blessing. Policy provisions that demand both local
and global control may seem like a helpful compromise. But if they are not
administered carefully, they can complicate oversight of and_ public
accountability for risk assessment instruments. Attempts to combine local
and global oversight—as seen, for instance, in SB 10’s requirement that local
coutts assess the accuracy and discriminatory potential of tools selected from
a Council-approved list—introduce a number of wrinkles.

Take validation, for instance. If a global body like the Council truly
validates a tool, then it is not clear how a locality could adapt it to meet
technical best practices and still permit global confidence in the tool. On the
other hand, if the locality validates the tool, then substantial resources will be
required for the global body to be certain that it meets its validation
requirements, or there will be no meaningful oversight.

The most auspicious way to manage these global-local tensions is to
approach mixed zones with caution. Caution in crafting a policy means
proceeding with an ex ante awareness of and explicit delineation of which
level(s) must participate at a given stage in the process, as a technical matter,
and how these considerations align with the allocation of decision-making
authority, as a policy matter. It also requires thinking carefully about how to
grant decision-making and oversight responsibility, particularly if a proposed
policy requires both local and global participation.

A Dash of Discretion. When used sparingly, allocating additional discretion
within the statute might at times solve patticularly thorny technical issues.
For instance, in thresholding, SB 10 appears to provide that the same
high/medium/low risk threshold set shall be applied to already-developed
assessment tools. However, as Part IV describes, this situation could lead to

 

127. See discussion supra Section IV.B.

2019] ALGORITHMIC RISK ASSESSMENT 735

global Council to designate which PAS “scores or levels” ate associated with
high, medium, or low risk levels.''' In operational terms, this means that each
individual is first assigned a score by a risk assessment tool. Then, the
individual is categorized into a risk group by thresholding their score: high
tisk if the score is above a certain value, low risk if it is below another value,
and so on. It may be tempting to assume that for any scores generated by a
fair system, however fairness is defined, a given threshold will guarantee
fairness.

But the practice of thresholding itself can produce a new set of
challenges.'”” First, as the technical fairness literature has emphasized, there
are several mathematical notions of fairness, each of which may tequire a
different set of thresholds.'’’ For example, many notions of fairness aim to
achieve a balance of classifier performance metrics, such as positive
predictive value, false negative rate, and false positive rate,’ between
different protected groups. Scholars have shown that no single threshold rule
can satisfy all three of these fairness definitions except in an unlikely
assumption;'” thus, choosing a threshold to enforce one notion of fairness
would violate another.

This Article emphasizes a less recognized second point: even with an
agreed-upon definition of fairness, enforcing it among subpopulations, such
as different ethnic groups, may be impossible without setting a different
threshold for each group.

 

111. Despite some textual ambiguity, the choice of the risk threshold—which triggers
the decision about how to treat an individual—is up to the Council. See supra note 79. Again,
the present discussion assumes that SB 10 provides for levels that are uniform across the
state.

112. For an interactive visualization of thresholding challenges, see Martin Wattenberg
et al, Artacking Discrimination with Smarter Machine Learning, GOOGLE RE
http://research.google.com/bigpicture/attacking-discrimination-in-ml/  [https://perma.cc/
A6JQ-496Q] (last visited Sept. 23, 2019).

113. See Narayanan, supra note 6.

114. In the context of pretrial risk assessment, positive predictive value refers to the
proportion of high-risk individuals who indeed recidivate or fail to appear in court; false
negative rate is the proportion of people who would recidivate or fail to appear but were
classified as low risk; and false positive rate is the proportion of people who would not
recidivate and who would appear in court but were classified as high risk. See supra text
accompanying note 6 and soutces cited therein.

115. The exception is when the base rate (e.g., the probability of recidivism or failure to
appear) is equal among the protected groups. See generally Alexandra Chouldechova, Fair
Prediction with Disparate Impact: A Study Of Bias In Recidivism Prediction Instruments, ARXIV (Feb.
28, 2017), https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.00056 [https://perma.cc/PAV8-SPT2]. Interestingly,
Northpointe cited the lack of equal base rates in the observed population as a defense of its
risk assessment tool during the COMPAS controversy. See supra text accompanying notes

48-52.

 

  

2019] ALGORITHMIC RISK ASSESSMENT 741

adequate democratic responsibility for the ways in which the algorithm
affects actual human lives.

In the face of such complexity, we advocate simplicity. The SB 10
example suggests that risk assessment statutes will run into trouble where
they create too many layers of discretion. There ate two specific issues. One,
if there are zones of ambiguous or even conflicting control, then there are
likely to be disparate effects across localities that undermine any effort to
create globally consistent policy outcomes. This will be the case when, for
example, there is a top-down, statewide definition of low, medium, and high
tisk and a locally validated tool applied in a jurisdiction that is smaller than
the state. Two, the very process of technical validation demands local
determination, and an attempt to too-strictly control the tool’s development
and implementation top-down will undermine any effort to create risk
assessment instruments that are locally accurate and unbiased. It is beyond
the scope of this analysis to endorse more global or local control; such
theoretical development of what to weigh in crafting a system of algorithmic
governance and how to strike the right balance of global and local when it
comes to both technical and policy choices awaits future research.'”
Nonetheless, simplicity counsels in favor of several preliminary lessons, with
associated implications for SB 10.

Less Can be More. Tools that attempt to introduce more factors might
increase accuracy, so long as the information is managed properly. Yet they
might also contain more opportunities for issues, like Simpson’s paradox
hidden discrimination, that can elude oversight systems, particularly systems
that operate at a global level and must account for many localities. For SB 10,
the tools ultimately adopted, if any, should use the minimum number of
factors that avoids problematic thresholding variance.

Timing Matters. Policymakers should take care in prescribing when global
oversight is helpful, and what each global and local actor, respectively, is
permitted to do at different stages of the tool development and deployment
process. For example, if there is a list of globally approved tools that have
been validated, as is the case for SB 10, may a locality undertake further
validation to respond to a demographic change or a local policy, such as bail
reform measures, that affect the likelihood of nonappearance? Risk
assessment tools will make stale predictions if they are trained on historical
data that does not account for more recent bail reforms.'*° To ensure that
localities can update their instruments to reflect changing conditions on the
ground, risk assessment statutes should both require ex post auditing of

 

125. See supra note 14 and accompanying text.
126. See Koepke & Robinson, Danger Ahead, supra note 13, at 24-38 (warning against
“zombie predictions” that rely on stale data).

738 BERKELEY TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL __ [Vol. 34:705

equally well-calibrated for both groups in the population as a whole. For
example, any individual assigned a score 0.8 will indeed have 0.8 probability
of committing a new crime or failing to appear in court. But the combination
of the tool’s quantitative scoring and the thresholding decision can still be
considered unfair for members of minority subpopulations.

Again, applying the parameters of a statute like SB 10, suppose that a
global body sets a threshold of 0.7 to classify an individual as high risk,
regardless of their group membership in Green or Blue. In such a situation,
about 0.81 of Green individuals in the resulting high-risk group would have
recidivated or failed to show up, whereas this proportion drops to 0.71 for
the Blue group. This is an example of a classifier failing to satisfy fairness as
defined by predictive parity (the balance in positive predictive value between
ethnic groups).''® On the other hand, setting a threshold for each group
independently could, in theory, achieve a more subgroup-sensitive
understanding of fairness.'? But this result would require far more
localization of the overarching policy categories.

Thresholding of low, medium, and high levels can thus lead to unfair risk
categorization in at least two ways. One, there may be unfairness due to
distributional differences among subpopulations (e.g., ethnic, gender, or age
groups). Two, there may be unfairness due to the inherent uncertainty in
statistical risk assessment tools. In the case of a statute that sets global
thresholding standards across the entire jurisdiction, as SB 10 appears to do,
these sorts of thresholding issues become especially stark. In addition to
underlying technical and normative questions about the “right” thresholding
practices, the way that the statute or regulation allocates authority becomes
critical. In particular, any global delineation might be difficult or even
impossible to correct when the entities tasked with correcting unfairness are
local. For instance, SB 10’s draft guidance requires local courts to consider
whether “any scientific research has raised questions that the particular
instrument unfairly classifies offenders based on race, ethnicity, gender, or

 

118. Predictive parity is sometimes referred to as calibration in the technical fairness
literature.

119. In fact, it has been mathematically proven that the optimal decision rule that
satisfies demographic parity has to set group-specific thresholds, whether the objective is to
optimize for accuracy or a more complex utility, such as balancing the social cost of releasing
a high-risk individual and the cost of maintaining jails. See Corbett-Davies & Sharad Goel,
supra note 105; Zachary C. Lipton et al., Does Mitigating ML’s Impact Disparity Require Treatment
Disparity?, ARXIV (Jan. 11, 2019), https://arxiv.org/pd£/1711.07076.pdf [https://perma.cc/
9S3P-WHY2]; Aditya Krishna Menon & Robert C. Williamson, The Cost of Fairness in Binary
Classification, CONF. ON FAIRNESS, ACCOUNTABILITY, & TRANSPARENCY, 107, 107-18
(2018).

720 BERKELEY TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL __ [Vol. 34:705

Council has long promulgated rules for the state’s judicial system. Since its
creation in 1926, it has operated under a state constitutional mandate to
“improve the administration of justice.” In addition to general
consideration for the public interest and judicial policymaking, the Council
fulfills this mandate by setting official rules of court for the state.” The
Council presently carries out its mission through a number of internal
committees, advisory committees, and task forces, which generally include
some combination of voting members and advisory members.”

In the SB 10 context, the Council manages the development of validated
tisk assessment tools, top-down. Specifically, the statute empowers the
Council to “adopt California Rules of Court and forms” as needed to
implement SB 10.” Among other responsibilities, the statute also directs the
Council to:

e “Compile and maintain a list of validated pretrial risk

29,74

assessment tools”;

e Identify, define, and collect “minimum required data to

be reported by each court”;”

e “Train judges on the use of pretrial risk assessment
information when making pretrial release and detention
decisions, and on the imposition of pretrial release
conditions”; and

 

70. See CAL. CONST. art. VI, § 6; see also LARRY L. SYPES, COMMITTED TO JUSTICE:
THE RISE OF JUDICIAL ADMINISTRATION IN CALIFORNIA 1 (2002),
http://www.courts.ca.gov/documents/sipes_intro.pdf [https://perma.cc/4ZZM-RVS9].
The Council consists of twenty-one voting members who ate assisted by advisory members
and Council staff. It is meant to be responsive to the public as a whole, and not to any
particular constituency.

71. See CAL. R. Cr. 10.1(b).

72. For instance, one internal committee is the Rules and Projects Committee, which
“establishes and maintains a rule-making process that is understandable and accessible to
justice system partners and the public.” CAL. R. Cr. 10.10; see generally Advisory Bodies, CAL.
Crs., http://www.courts.ca.gov/advisorybodies.htm [https://perma.cc/ZWH5-FINV] (last
visited Sept. 22, 2019). These advisory bodies are governed by the California Rules of Coutt.
Cal. R. Ct. 10.30; see also Judicial Council Governance Policies, \UD. COUNCIL CAL. 4 (Nov. 2017),
http://www.coutts.ca.gov/documents/JCGovernancePolicies.pdf [https://perma.cc/
W5UB-4LA3}].

73. Cal. S.B. 10 § 4 (enacted) (adding CAL. PENAL CODE § 1320.24(a)).

74, Id. (adding CAL, PENAL CODE § 1320.24(e)(1)).

75. Id. (adding CAL. PENAL CODE §§ 1320.24(b)(1), 1320.24(e)(2)).

76. Id. (adding CAL. PENAL CODE § 1320.24(e)(3)).

  

2019] ALGORITHMIC RISK ASSESSMENT 731

level” Yet each will treat an identical individual differently because they

interpret unfair classification differently in their treatment of proxies.

This outcome, moreover, illustrates a broader global-local proxy tension.
As a technical matter, a policy that permits each locality to determine how to
handle proxies permits inconsistent decisions regarding treatment of proxies
across counties. It is thus possible to have different outcomes for the same
hypothetical individual based on the county where they are located, which
may feel unfair from the perspective of the individual. But as a policy matter,
county-level discretion about how to validate a tool may enhance local self-
determination, which may feel more fair from the perspective of the locality
as a whole. And the issue is even more complex because there may also be
important technical reasons to permit local proxy determinations.

To see why, imagine that the global statute outright barred any use of
particular protected attributes or their proxies. The trouble with such a global
fiat is that the strength of the proxy, defined as its level of correlation with
the protected attribute, can vary both in each county and in the state as a
whole. In such a case, a county that does of exhibit a correlation between a
protected attribute and a specified proxy would need to exclude variables that
do not pose a huge proxy problem, thereby sacrificing accuracy. On the
other hand, county-by-county determination of proxies is likely to be not
only extremely resource intensive, but also problematic insofar as the result is
a patchwork of county-by-county policy calls that make global oversight
challenging. Neither a global nor a local solution is perfect. And as we will
see in the following two Sections, global policy requirements come with
further costs.

B. SIMPSON’S PARADOX

Without a uniform, top-down understanding of what fairness requires,
problems might arise where global as opposed to local parsing of data leads
in different directions. Specifically, applying SB 10’s requirements, there is a
tisk of Simpson’s paradox. Simpson’s paradox refers to a_ statistical
phenomenon in which a trend appears in several subgroups of a population,
yet that same trend disappears or reverses when the subgroups are
ageregated.'* Consider, for instance, a group of men and women who work
at a university that has two departments: Department A and Department B.
Imagine a hypothetical algorithm that determines who receives a positive
outcome, such as promotion in the department. In Department A, twenty-
five percent of women receive a favorable decision, and no men receive that
decision, such that there is evidence of systematic bias against these men. In

 

107. Proposed Rules 4.10 & 4.40, supra note 82, at 11-12.
108. Judea Pearl, Understanding Simpson's Paradox, 68 AM. STATISTICIAN 8 (2014).

744 BERKELEY TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL __ [Vol. 34:705

This Article encourages policymakers and technologists to ask these and
related questions, by design.

Initial statutory and regulatory decisions should thus be made with
attention to local-global tradeoffs, technical limitations, non-negotiable policy
objectives, and underlying normative principles. A failure to grapple with
these questions will not erase them. Where there are too many layers of
discretion and too many local-global tensions, we would be ill-advised to rely
on algorithmic risk assessment instruments as criminal justice tools.

2019] ALGORITHMIC RISK ASSESSMENT 739

income level.’””'”’ Scientific research might indeed raise questions, but whether
the questions matter in fairness determinations cannot be answered in the
abstract. Rather, the very definition of “unfairly classify[ing]”'' is bound up
in antecedent global choices about risk thresholds, such that this sort of
global-local allocation risks asking local actors to account for choices over
which they have no meaningful input or control.

This issue can, moreover, further be compounded with demographic
discrepancies among counties or between counties and the state. For
example, versions of Simpson’s paradox mean that a threshold chosen to be
fair at the state level may not achieve fairness at the level of individual
counties. Recall how, in the first Green/Blue group example, the original
threshold of 0.7 was adjusted down for the Green group and up for the Blue
group in order to make the categorization fair in the sense of equal false
positive rates. Suppose that this choice was made at the state level. If
Simpson’s paradox is present and the distributional difference in each county
reverses the direction, such that the Green group in fact has a higher mean
risk score at the county level, then this pair of thresholds set by the state
would be making the risk categorization less fair at the county level.
Conversely, suppose once more that every county uses the same tisk
threshold in an attempt to be fair across the state. This approach is likely to
run into different technical issues: an attempt to threshold such that the
resulting risk categorization is fair in every county may not exist unless the
thresholding itself is minimal, such as, for instance, a system that assigns
everyone to a single risk group. In other words, an attempt to be fair at the
global level may end up being unfair at the local level, yet an attempt to be
fair at the local level may be technically impossible without making the
instrument close to useless. This global-local tension is a hidden consequence
of the technical choices required to build risk assessment instruments.

The cumulative upshot of these sorts of technical considerations is that
risk assessment tools require complex webs of policy and technical choices,
globally and locally. Maximizing technical objectives will demand policy
tradeoffs, and vice versa. A failure to begin with this ground-level awareness
is tantamount to creating black box policy regimes that turn out to be
Pandora’s Boxes if we try to open them down the line. The following Part
thus builds from the specific tradeoffs observed in a statute with terms like

 

120. Judicial Council of Cal., Invitation to Comment: SP18-23, CAL. Crs. 10 (2018),
https://www.courts.ca.gov/documents/SP18-23.pdf [https://perma.cc/YV97-FNXQ].
121. Id.
