Algorithmic Fairness on Graphs: Methods and Trends

Jian Kang
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
jiank2@illinois.edu

ABSTRACT

Graph is a ubiquitous type of data that appears in many real-world
applications, including social network analysis, recommendations
and financial security. Important as it is, decades of research have
developed plentiful computational models to mine graphs. Despite
its prosperity, concerns with respect to the potential algorithmic
discrimination have been grown recently. Algorithmic fairness on
graphs, which aims to mitigate bias introduced or amplified during
the graph mining process, is an attractive yet challenging research
topic. The first challenge corresponds to the theoretical challenge,
where the non-IID nature of graph data may not only invalidate
the basic assumption behind many existing studies in fair machine
learning, but also introduce new fairness definition(s) based on the
inter-correlation between nodes rather than the existing fairness
definition(s) in fair machine learning. The second challenge regard-
ing its algorithmic aspect aims to understand how to balance the
trade-off between model accuracy and fairness. This tutorial aims
to (1) comprehensively review the state-of-the-art techniques to
enforce algorithmic fairness on graphs and (2) enlighten the open
challenges and future directions. We believe this tutorial could ben-
efit researchers and practitioners from the areas of data mining,
artificial intelligence and social science.

CCS CONCEPTS

+ Information systems — Data mining.

KEYWORDS
Graph mining, algorithmic fairness, bias

ACM Reference Format:

Jian Kang and Hanghang Tong. 2022. Algorithmic Fairness on Graphs:
Methods and Trends. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference
on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD 22), August 14-18, 2022,
Washington, DC, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2 pages. https://doi.org/
10.1145/3534678.3542599

1 AUDIENCE PARTICIPATION

The tutorial is designed for researchers and practitioners in data
mining, artificial intelligence, social science and other interdisci-
plinary areas. The prerequisites include basic knowledge on proba-
bility, linear algebra, data mining and machine learning. No prior
knowledge on algorithmic fairness or any specific algorithm is re-
quired. This tutorial is designed for 40% novice, 30% intermediate,

 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).

KDD ’22, August 14-18, 2022, Washington, DC, USA

© 2022 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).

ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9385-0/22/08.

https://doi.org/10.1145/3534678.3542599

Hanghang Tong
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
htong@illinois.edu

30% expert, in order to achieve a good balance between the intro-
ductory and advanced materials. During the tutorial, we will alter
between lecture and discussion with the audience to encourage au-
dience participation. We will also post the materials of this tutorial
(e.g., tutorial description, presentation slides, pre-recorded videos)
for post-tutorial dissemination.

2 PRESENTER BIOGRAPHY

Jian Kang is currently a Ph.D. student in the Department of Com-
puter Science at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. He
received his M.CS. degree in Computer Science from the University
of Virginia in 2016 and B.Eng. degree in Telecommunication Engi-
neering from Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
in 2014. His current research interests lie in large-scale data mining
and machine learning, especially on graphs, with a focus on their
algorithmic fairness. His research works on related topics have been
published at several major conferences and journals in data mining
and artificial intelligence. He has also served as a reviewer and a
program committee member in top-tier data mining and artificial
intelligence venues and journals (e.g., NeurIPS, ICML, ICLR, CIKM,
WSDM, JMLR, TKDE, etc). For more information, please refer to
his personal website at http://jiank2.web illinois.edu/.

Hanghang Tong is currently an associate professor at De-
partment of Computer Science at University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign. Before that he was an associate professor at School
of Computing, Informatics, and Decision Systems Engineering
(CIDSE), Arizona State University. He received his M.Sc. and Ph.D.
degrees from Carnegie Mellon University in 2008 and 2009, both
in machine learning. His research interest is in large-scale data
mining for graphs and multimedia. He has received several awards,
including SDM/IBM Early Career Data Mining Research award
(2018), NSF CAREER award (2017), ICDM 10-Year Highest Impact
Paper award (2015), and four best paper awards (TUP’14, CIKM’12,
SDM’08, ICDM’06). He has published over 100 refereed articles. He
is the Editor-in-Chief of SIGKDD Explorations (ACM), an action
editor of Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery (Springer), and an
associate editor of Knowledge and Information Systems (Springer);
and has served as a program committee member in data mining,
database and artificial intelligence venues (e.g., SIGKDD, SIGMOD,
AAAI, WWW, CIKM). He is a Fellow of IEEE. For more information,
please refere to his personal website at http://tonghanghang.org/.

3 OUTLINE OF TUTORIAL

¢ Introduction

We will discuss with the background knowledge for the topic,
then briefly review existing problem definitions and settings,
along with the key challenges in this topic. We will also
introduce problems in relation to algorithmic fairness on
graphs, including auditing [6], adversarial attack [17], pri-
vacy preservation [16] and uncertainty quantification [15].
— Background and motivations

KDD '22, August 14-18, 2022, Washington, DC, USA

— Problem definitions and settings
— Key challenges
— Related problems

e Part I: Group Fairness on Graphs
In this part, we will discuss how to enforce fairness among
nodes of different demographic groups, i.e., group fairness,
for classic graph mining (e.g., ranking, clustering) and for
advanced graph mining (e.g., graph neural networks).
— Classic graph mining [12, 13]
— Advanced graph mining [2, 3, 8, 10]

e Part II: Individual Fairness on Graphs
In this part, we will introduce how to operationalize individ-
ual fairness on graphs.
— Optimization-based methods [5]
~ Ranking-based methods [4]

e Part III: Other Fairness Notions on Graphs
In this part, we will study how to enforce three fairness
notions on graphs as follows, other than the extensively
studied group fairness and individual fairness.
- Rawlsian fairness [7]
— Degree-related fairness [11]
- Counterfactual fairness [1, 9]

e Part IV: Beyond Fairness on Graphs
In this part, we will discuss problems in relation to fairness,
as well as their corresponding state-of-the-art techniques.
— Interpretability [14]
— Robustness [17]
- Accountability [6]

e Part V: Future Trends
In this part, we elucidate open challenges and future direc-
tions from the following perspectives.
— Benchmark datasets and evaluation metrics
— Interpretable fairness on graphs
— Fairness on dynamic graphs

4 RELATED TUTORIALS

Here, we discuss the most relevant tutorials in other conferences,
as well as the similarities/differences compared with ours.

e Fair Graph Mining

— Presenters: Jian Kang, Hanghang Tong

- Conference: CIKM, Nov. 1 - 5, 2021, Virtual Conference

— Connection: This is an earlier version of this tutorial on
algorithmic fairness on graph mining.

— Difference: There will be some overlaps between the
related tutorial and this tutorial (e.g., preliminaries and
foundation of fair graph algorithms). However, in this
tutorial, we will identify new challenge(s) (e.g., edge-level
fairness), introduce recent advances that were not covered
before (e.g., [3, 7-9, 12]) and provide new insights on the
future directions (e.g., benchmark datasets and evaluation
metrics for algorithmic fairness on graphs, relationship
between fairness and other important aspects of graph
algorithms such as interpretability, robustness, etc.)

e Fairness in Networks

— Presenters: Sorelle Friedler, Carlos Scheidegger, Suresh
Venkatasubramanian, Aaron Clauset

— Conference: KDD, Aug. 14 - 18, 2021, Virtual Conference

5

Jian Kang and Hanghang Tong

— Connection: Both tutorials aim to introduce fairness on
graphs.

— Difference: The related tutorial focuses on fairness from
the social welfare perspective for information access and
influence maximization, whereas our tutorial present fair-
ness on graphs in a much broader scope. Our tutorial
differs the related tutorial in two aspects: (1) we review
various fairness notions including group fairness, individ-
ual fairness, degree-related fairness and counterfactual
fairness, in addition to the fairness from the social wel-
fare aspect (e.g., the Rawlsian difference principle); (2)
we include a wider coverage of research works in graph
mining, including classic graph mining (e.g., ranking and
clustering) and advanced graph mining (e.g., embedding
and graph neural networks).

POTENTIAL SOCIETAL IMPACTS

This tutorial has several potential positive impacts to the society:
(1) we hope this tutorial could attract research attention to promote
fairness on graphs, which is less popular than fairness for IID data;
(2) we hope this tutorial raises new challenges that are not addressed
in the existing works; (3) we hope this tutorial could also benefit
related research topic in identifying new problems and discovering
its relationship to fairness on graphs.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work is supported by NSF (1947135, 2134079 and 1939725.
REFERENCES

1

 

Chirag Agarwal, Himabindu Lakkaraju, and Marinka Zitnik. 2021. Towards a
Unified Framework for Fair and Stable Graph Representation Learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2102. 13186 (2021).

Avishek Bose and William Hamilton. 2019. Compositional Fairness Constraints
for Graph Embeddings. In ICML.

Enyan Dai and Suhang Wang. 2021. Say No to the Discrimination: Learning
Fair Graph Neural Networks with Limited Sensitive Attribute Information. In
WSDM.

Yushun Dong, Jian Kang, Hanghang Tong, and Jundong Li. 2021. Individual
Fairness for Graph Neural Networks: A Ranking based Approach. In KDD.

Jian Kang, Jingrui He, Ross Maciejewski, and Hanghang Tong. 2020. InFoRM:
Individual Fairness on Graph Mining. In KDD. 379-389.

Jian Kang and Hanghang Tong. 2019. N2N: Network Derivative Mining. In CIKM.
861-870.

Jian Kang, Yan Zhu, Yinglong Xia, Jiebo Luo, Hanghang Tong, and Xin Wang.
2022. RawlsGCN: Towards Rawlsian Difference Principle on Graph Convolutional
Network. In WWW.

Peizhao Li, Yifei Wang, Han Zhao, Pengyu Hong, and Hongfu Liu. 2020. On
Dyadic Fairness: Exploring and Mitigating Bias in Graph Connections. In ICLR.
Jing Ma, Ruocheng Guo, Mengting Wan, Longqi Yang, Aidong Zhang, and Jun-
dong Li. 2022. Learning Fair Node Representations with Graph Counterfactual
Fairness. WSDM.

Tahleen A Rahman, Bartlomiej Surma, Michael Backes, and Yang Zhang. 2019.
Fairwalk: Towards Fair Graph Embedding. In [JCAL 3289-3295.

Xianfeng Tang, Huaxiu Yao, Yiwei Sun, Yiqi Wang, Jiliang Tang, Charu Aggarwal,
Prasenjit Mitra, and Suhang Wang. 2020. Investigating and Mitigating Degree-
Related Biases in Graph Convoltuional Networks. In CIKM. 1435-1444.

Sotiris Tsioutsiouliklis, Evaggelia Pitoura, Konstantinos Semertzidis, and Panayi-
otis Tsaparas. 2022. Link Recommendations for PageRank Fairness. In WWW.
Sotiris Tsioutsiouliklis, Evaggelia Pitoura, Panayiotis Tsaparas, Ilias Kleftakis,
and Nikos Mamoulis. 2021. Fairness-Aware PageRank. In WWW. 3815-3826.
Hao Yuan, Haiyang Yu, Jie Wang, Kang Li, and Shuiwang Ji. 2021. On explainabil-
ity of graph neural networks via subgraph explorations. In ICML. 12241-12252.
Xujiang Zhao, Feng Chen, Shu Hu, and Jin-Hee Cho. 2020. Uncertainty Aware
Semi-Supervised Learning on Graph Data. In NeurlPS, Vol. 33.

Jun Zhou, Chaochao Chen, Longfei Zheng, Xiaolin Zheng, Bingzhe Wu, Ziqi
Liu, and Li Wang. 2020. Privacy-Preserving Graph Neural Network for Node
Classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.11903 (2020).

Daniel Ziigner, Amir Akbarnejad, and Stephan Giinnemann. 2018. Adversarial
Attacks on Neural Networks for Graph Data. In KDD. 2847-2856.
