ACL Supplement: Introduction

GuesT ediTors: irene davis, PT, PhD1,2 • Mary LLoyd ireLand, MD3 • saori 
Hanaki, MS, ATC4

ACL Injuries—The Gender Bias
Research Retreat III

April 6-8, 2006 t Lexington, KY

T

his was the third research retreat focused on gender bias in anterior cruciate 
ligament (ACL)
injuries. The first 2 took place in Lexington, KY in April of 2001 and 2003. 
The purpose of
this third retreat was to continue to examine the factors thought to be 
associated with gender
bias in ACL injuries. In addition, we sought to revisit and update the 
consensus statement

from 2003.1 A call for abstracts for the retreat was announced in the summer of 
2005. All received
abstracts were then peer-reviewed for scientific merit and relevance to the 
retreat topic. There was a
50% increase in the number of abstract submissions this year. In the end, 33 
abstracts were accepted.


These were grouped into sessions addressing structural,
neuromuscular, biomechanical, and hormonal factors
that may influence the gender bias in ACL injury in-
cidence. It was interesting to note that the majority of
abstracts submitted were in the area of neuromuscular
and biomechanical factors, with only a few in the ar-
eas of structural and hormonal factors. This suggests a
trend in the research focus towards the more modifiable
factors. The retreat was cohosted by Kentucky Sports
Medicine and Drayer Physical Therapy Institute and
sponsored by DonJoy, Aircast, Bluegrass Bracing, and
Smith and Nephew. To accommodate the increase in
number of high-quality abstracts, the meeting was ex-
tended to 2 full days. The retreat was attended by both
clinicians and scientists with a common interest in the
ACL injury gender bias. The 60-plus participants in-
cluded registrants from across the United States as well
as Canada and Australia. As with the previous retreats,
the group consisted of physicians, physical therapists,
athletic trainers, and scientists in the areas of biome-
chanics, motor control, and neuromuscular function.

Thirty percent of the participants in the 2006 retreat
were participants in a previous retreat as well. The for-
mat of the meeting included 1 keynote presentation per
day, along with 15-minute podium presentations made
by some of the participants. The keynote presenters
were chosen for their scientific contribution to the un-
derstanding of factors associated with the gender bias
seen   in the incidence of ACL injuries. Ton van den Bo-
gert, PhD, from the Department of Biomedical Engi-
neering at the Cleveland Clinic gave the first keynote
titled “ACL Injuries: Do We Know the Mechanisms?”
The second keynote presenter was William Garrett,
MD, PhD, from the Department of Orthopedics at Duke
University, whose talk was titled “Anterior Cruciate Lig-
ament Injury Mechanisms and Risk Factors.” Following
all of the presentations, a consensus development ses-
sion was held. In the following pages, you will find the
consensus statement and an abstract on each of the 33
presentations made at the conference, organized by the
topics listed above. t

1 University of Delaware, Newark, DE. 2 Drayer Physical Therapy Institute, 
Hummelstown, PA. 3 Kentucky Sports Medicine Center, Lexington, KY. 4 University 
of Kentucky, Lexington, KY.

journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy | volume 37 | number 2 | 
february 2007 | a 


ACL Supplement: Consensus Statement

GuesT ediTors: irene davis, PT, PhD1,2 • Mary LLoyd ireLand, MD3 • saori 
Hanaki, MS, ATC4

ACL Injuries—The Gender Bias

T

he consensus statement was developed with input from all of the participants. 
Once all
papers were presented, the participants formed into groups, based upon each of 
the factors
discussed during the meeting. As with previous retreats, the consensus was 
formed through
discussion of what we know, which was grounded in the recent literature and 
information
presented at the current retreat. The group then identified what is still 
unknown (what we
don’t know) about each factor’s contribution to the gender bias. This led to 
the final part of the
consensus, in which suggestions for future research directions were made. Each 
group was charged


with providing a draft consensus statement that was then
presented to the group for further discussion. Participants
agreed that the consensus should be viewed as the present
state of thought about anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) in-
juries, based upon current knowledge. As with previous re-
treats, it was acknowledged that what we know will likely
evolve with time.

Participants continue to agree that, while there is a gender
bias in ACL injuries, some of the identified factors (struc-
tural, neuromuscular, and biomechanical) may not be purely
gender specific. Some males may also exhibit these factors
and be at greater risk for ACL injury. The question of whether
females should move like men or whether there is a different
optimal pattern for them was also again discussed, but not
resolved. However, it is apparent that the current movement
patterns of females place them at increased risk for injury.
Finally, there was a group consensus that more ecological
studies are needed to better replicate the environments in
which the injuries typically occur.

New to this year’s retreat were presentations on the use
of 2-dimensional techniques to assess movement patterns.
These approaches are important as they can be easily imple-
mented in the clinic. They also provide a means to conduct
large-scale screening studies to predict injury risk and as-
sess the effect of intervention programs. Another new topic
discussed this year was gender differences in variability of
movement. This is an emerging topic in the biomechanics
community, with ongoing discussions of the importance of
variability in reducing injury risk. However, excessive vari-

ability of movement may be detrimental. Therefore, the op-
timal level of variability requires further defining.

Following are the sections of the consensus statement for
each of the factors thought to be associated with the ACL
injury gender bias, as well as for the section on interven-
tion programs. We realize that these lists are not all inclu-
sive; however, they do represent the collective opinions of
the participants in this retreat. Many of the questions from
the previous retreat remain unanswered. It is our hope that
this consensus statement will promote research studies in the
suggested areas so that some of these gaps in the literature
might be filled by the next ACL research retreat.

BioMeCHaniCaL FaCTors

What We know

1. Females (adults and children) have higher knee valgus
angles and moments during a variety of cutting, landing,
and squatting tasks.8,9,10,19,23,24

2. These increased valgus angles and moments have been
shown to be associated with ACL injury risk both experi-
mentally5 and in a computational model.13

3. Females demonstrate decreased hip flexion angles9,12 and
knee flexion stiffness15 during cutting tasks.

4. Hip adduction angles during a variety of activities are
greater in females3,4,16,23 and are positively related to knee
valgus angles.14

5. Hip transverse10,20 and frontal plane angles20 are related
to knee valgus moments during cutting tasks.

1 University of Delaware, Newark, DE. 2 Drayer Physical Therapy Institute, 
Hummelstown, PA. 3 Kentucky Sports Medicine Center, Lexington, KY. 4 University 
of Kentucky, Lexington, KY.

a | february 007 | volume 37 | number  | journal of orthopaedic & sports 
physical therapy


ACL Supplement: Consensus Statement


6. Knee frontal and sagittal plane moments at both slow and
fast speeds are influenced by anticipation.1,6 Thus, tasks
that incorporate more ecological conditions may result in
differences in knee biomechanical variables.11,18,21

7. Frontal plane trunk adaptations are associated with al-
terations in frontal plane knee moments.7

8. 2-D methods under specific conditions may be used to
predict static and dynamic knee valgus.2,22

What We don’t know

1. How do multiplanar mechanics of the lower extremity
combine during movement to induce ACL injury?

2. How do posture and balance of the trunk influence lower
extremity mechanics?

3. What are the most useful measures of variability (ie, joint
angles, continuous relative phase angles, joint kinetics)?
Is there an optimal window of variability in terms of in-
jury risk and can variability be altered with training?

4. How do maturation levels influence mechanics during
dynamic activities?

5. To what extent do mechanics observed in the lab relate
to and reflect those observed in the real world (ie, game
situations)?

6. Is the 2-D knee valgus angle predictive of those at risk for
ACL injury?

Where do We Go From Here?

1. Further explore the influence of the trunk on lower ex-
tremity mechanics.

2. Determine when maturation of biomechanical patterns
occurs.

3. Explore biomechanical definitions of variability as a risk
factor for ACL injury.

4. Further explore the association of biomechanical vari-
ables to predict injury.

5. Develop biomechanical models to explore the role of me-
chanics in ACL injury.

6. Identify specific methods that have ecological validity for
evaluating injury risk. In addition, develop methods to
assess dynamics in real life (ie, game) situations.

7. Examine whether simple 2-D measures are predictive of
injury risk.

reFerenCes

1.  Besier TF, Lloyd DG, Ackland TR, Cochrane JL. Anticipatory effects on knee
joint loading during running and cutting maneuvers. Med Sci Sports Exerc.
2001;33:1176-1181.

2. Earl JE, Monteiro SK, Geiser CF. Reliability and validity of a 2-D approach
to assessing frontal plane dynamic alignment of the lower extremity [ab-
stract]. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 2006;37:xxx-xxx.

3.  Ferber R, Davis IM, Williams DS, 3rd. Gender differences in lower extremity

mechanics during running. Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon). 2003;18:350-357.

4. Ford KR, Myer GD, Toms HE, Hewett TE. Gender differences in the kine-
matics of unanticipated cutting in young athletes. Med Sci Sports Exerc.
2005;37:124-129.

5.  Hewett TE, Myer GD, Ford KR, et al. Biomechanical measures of neuromus-
cular control and valgus loading of the knee predict anterior cruciate liga-
ment injury risk in female athletes: a prospective study. Am J Sports Med.
2005;33:492-501.

6.  Houck J, De Haven K, Maloney M. Associations between planning time
and kinetic variables during an unexpected cut tasks [abstract]. J Orthop
Sports Phys Ther. 2007;37:A14-A15.

7.  Houck HR, Duncan A, De Havenc KE. Comparison of frontal plane trunk
kinematics and hip and knee moments during anticipated and unanticipated
walking and side step cutting tasks. Gait Posture. 2006;24:314-322.

8.  Malinzak RA, Colby SM, Kirkendall DT, Yu B, Garrett WE. A comparison of
knee joint motion patterns between men and women in selected athletic
tasks. Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon). 2001;16:438-445.

9.  McKean KA, Landry SC, Hubley-Kozey CL, Deluzio KJ, Stanish WD. Kinematic
and kinetic differences between male and female soccer players [abstract]. J
Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 2007;37:A12.

10. McLean SG, Huang X, van den Bogert AJ. Association between lower extrem-
ity posture at contact and peak knee valgus moment during sidestepping:
implications for ACL injury. Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon). 2005;20:863-870.

11. McLean SG, Lipfert SW, Van Den Bogert, AJ. Effect of gender and defensive
opponent on the biomechanics of sidestep cutting. Med Sci Sport Exer.
2004; 36(6);1008-1016.

12. McLean SG, Su A, van den Bogert AJ. Development and validation of a 3-D
model to predict knee joint loading during dynamic movement. J Biomech
Eng. 2003;125:864-874.

13. McLean SG, Walker KB, van den Bogert AJ. Effect of gender on lower extrem-
ity kinematics during rapid direction changes: an integrated analysis of three
sports movements. J Sci Med Sport. 2005;8:411-422.

14. Padua DA, Marchall SW, Beutler AI, et al. Anterior tibial shear force and 
knee
valgus angle are influenced by lower extremity kinematics, muscle strength,
and landing technique [abstract]. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 2007;37:A26-A27.

15. Pollard CD, Heiderscheit BC, van Emmerik RE, Hamill J. Gender differences in
lower extremity coupling variability during an unanticipated cutting maneu-
ver. J Appl Biomech. 2005;21:143-152.

16. Pollard CD, Sigward SM, Ota S, Langford K, Powers CM. The influence of
in-season injury prevention training on lower-extremity kinematics during
landing in female soccer players. Clin J Sport Med. 2006;16:223-227.

17. Pollard CD, Sigward SM, Powers CM. Gender differences in knee joint torsion-
al stiffness during a side-step cutting maneuver [abstract]. J Orthop Sports
Phys Ther. 2007;37:A13-A14.

18. Shapiro R, Buhr J, Hanaki S. Effect of condition, executing a cutting maneu-
ver or remaining stationary after landing, and gender on landing kinematics
[abstract]. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 2007;37:A15-A16.

19. Sigward S, Powers CM. The influence of experience on knee mechan-
ics during side-step cutting in females. Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon).
2006;21:740-747.

20. Sigward SM, Powers CM. Loading characteristics of females who exhibit ex-
cessive valgus moments during side-step cutting [abstract]. J Orthop Sports
Phys Ther. 2007;37:A12-A13.

21. Swartz EE, Metivier SJ, Decoster LC. Gender differences in landing using
functional vs. nonfunctional tasks [abstract]. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther.
2007;37A16-A17.

22. Willson JD, Davis I. Utility of the frontal plane projection angle of the 
knee dur-
ing single leg squats [abstract]. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 2007;37:A19-A20.

23. Willson JD, Ireland ML, Davis I. Core strength and lower extremity alignment
during single leg squats. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2006;38:945-952.

24. Onate JA, Belez AL, Van Lunen BL, Cortes N. Lower extremity motion pat-
terns in youth sports camp participants performing five types of sports-spe-
cific stop-jump landing tasks. J Athl Train. 2005;40:S20.

journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy | volume 37 | number  | 
february 007 | a3



neuroMusCuLar FaCTors

What We know

1. Muscle strength and knee kinematics are weakly to mod-
erately related.4,8,12 This suggests that other neuromuscu-
lar factors, such as muscle timing and activation patterns,
may also be important.

2 Females have been shown to exhibit different quadriceps,
hamstrings, and gastrocnemius muscle activation pat-
terns than males.5,7,9,13

3. Females are weaker (normalized to body weight) in hip
strength1 as well as quadriceps and hamstring strength6
measures than males.

4. Muscle activation differs during anticipated and unantici-
pated tasks.2,5,10

5. Muscle  activation  patterns  can  be  changed  with
training.3

What We don’t know

1.  Whether muscle activation differences between males
and females relate to ACL injury risk.

2. Which strength measures best correlate to knee kinemat-
ics and kinetics?

3. How activation (ie, amplitude, onset, timing) of specific
muscles at the hip, knee, and ankle influences knee kine-
matics and kinetics?

4. How to most effectively alter muscle activation with
training?

5. Whether changes in muscle activation induced by train-
ing and measured in the lab translate to functional/game-
like settings.

Where to Go From Here

1.  Continue to investigate the influence of strength on knee
mechanics by varying strength testing protocols. These
might include eccentric action testing, velocity-specific
testing, and angle-specific testing.

2. Determine if there is a critical threshold of strength gain
needed to facilitate changes in knee mechanics.

3. Continue to investigate how hip and ankle muscle activa-
tion influence knee mechanics.

4. Continue to investigate muscle activation during “sport-
specific” tasks associated with ACL injury.

5. Continue to investigate how trunk position and core sta-
bility influences knee mechanics.

6. Develop reliable and valid clinical measures of neuromus-
cular control.

reFerenCes

1.  Anderson AF, Dome DC, Gautam S, Awh MH, Rennirt GW. Correlation of an-
thropometric measurements, strength, anterior cruciate ligament size, and
intercondylar notch characteristics to sex differences in anterior cruciate
ligament tear rates. Am J Sports Med. 2001;29:58-66.

2. Besier TF, Lloyd DG, Cochrane JL, Ackland TR. External loading of the
knee joint during running and cutting maneuvers. Med Sci Sports Exerc.
2001;33:1168-1175.

3.  Cowan SM, Bennell KL, Crossley KM, Hodges PW, McConnell J. Physical
therapy alters recruitment of the vasti in patellofemoral pain syndrome.
Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2002;34:1879-1885.

4.  Herman DC, Weinhold PS, Guskiewicz KM, Garrett WE, Yu B, Padua DA. The
effects of strength training on the neuromuscular characteristics of a stop-
jump task in female recreational athletes [abstract]. J Orthop Sports Phys
Ther. 2007;37:A24.

5.  Landry SC, McKean KA, Hubley-Kozey CL, Deluzio KJ, Stanish WD. Differ-
ences exist in neuromuscular patterns during unanticipated running and
cutting maneuvers between elite male and female soccer players [ab-
stract]. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 2007;37:A23.

6.  Lephart SM, Ferris CM, Riemann BL, Myers JB, Fu FH. Gender differences
in strength and lower extremity kinematics during landing. Clin Orthop
Relat Res. 2002;162-169.

7.  Malinzak RA, Colby SM, Kirkendall DT, Yu B, Garrett WE. A comparison of
knee joint motion patterns between men and women in selected athletic
tasks. Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon). 2001;16:438-445.

8. McGinn PA, Mattacola CG, Malone TR, Johnson DL, Shapiro R. Strength
training for 6-weeks does not significantly alter landing mechanics of
female collegiate basketball athletes [abstract]. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther.
2007;37:A24.

9. Myer GD, Ford KR, Hewett TE. The effects of gender on quadriceps muscle
activation strategies during a maneuver that mimics a high ACL injury risk
position. J Electromyogr Kinesiol. 2005;15:181-189.

10. Saunders N, Otago L, McLean SG. Differences in lower-limb neuromuscular
control between sports movements executed in laboratory and game set-
tings. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 2007;37:A22.

11. Sell TC, Ferris CM, Abt JP, et al. The effect of direction and reaction on 
the
neuromuscular and biomechanical characteristics of the knee during tasks
that simulate the noncontact anterior cruciate ligament injury mechanism.
Am J Sports Med. 2006;34:43-54.

12. Shimokochi Y, Lee SY, Schmitz RJ, Shultz SJ. Eccentric thigh strength and
ankle eversion motion predict tibial internal rotation at the knee [abstract].
J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 2007;37:A20-A21.

13. Sigward S, Powers CM. The influence of experience on knee mechan-
ics during side-step cutting in females. Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon).
2006;21:740-747.

inTervenTion ProGraMs

What We know

1. Various training programs that incorporate elements of
perturbation training, plyometric training, education,
strengthening, and feedback have been shown to alter
biomechanical and neuromuscular variables thought to
contribute to ACL injury.3,5,7,8,9,12,13

2. Various intervention programs have been shown to re-
duce the incidence of ACL injuries.4,6,10

3. The protective effects of strength training appear to be
transient.1,2,11

What We don’t know

1. What are the mechanisms underlying the success of var-
ious injury prevention programs? Specifically, what ele-
ments of an injury prevention program (strengthening,
plyometrics, etc) produce the desired protective effect?

2. How much training stimulus (ie, duration and timing) is



required to produce the desired protective effect and how
long does the effect last?

3. At what age should an injury prevention program be
implemented to produce maximum effects?

4. Do intervention programs need to be tailored to specific
sports, specific ages, or an individual athlete’s needs?

5. Do intervention programs influence athletic performance?

Where do We Go From Here?

1. Evaluate various intervention modalities (individually
or in combination) to determine the optimal approach
to alter biomechanical and neuromuscular risk factors
thought to contribute to ACL injury.

2. Develop screening tools to identify at-risk individuals
who would most benefit from an intervention program.

3. Evaluate how athletes of different stages of maturation
respond to injury prevention programs.

4. Determine the optimal timing of an intervention with
respect to the competitive season.

5. Evaluate whether injury prevention programs affect ath-
letic performance.

6. Continue conducting prospective, randomized, double-
blind studies to evaluate the ability of prevention strate-
gies to prevent ACL injuries.

reFerenCes

1.  Graves JE, Pollock ML, Leggett SH, Braith RW, Carpenter DM, Bishop LE. Ef-
fect of reduced training frequency on muscular strength. Int J Sports Med.
1988;9:316-319.

2.  Hakkinen K, Alen M, Kallinen M, Newton RU, Kraemer WJ. Neuromus-
cular adaptation during prolonged strength training, detraining and re-
strength-training in middle-aged and elderly people. Eur J Appl Physiol.
2000;83:51-62.

3.  Herman DC, Weinhold PS, Guskiewicz KM, Garrett WE, Yu B, Padua DA. The
effect of strength training on the neuromuscular characteristics of a stop-
jump task in female recreational athletes [abstract]. J Orthop Sports Phys
Ther. 2007;37:A24.

4.  Hewett TE, Lindenfeld TN, Riccobene JV, Noyes FR. The effect of neuromus-
cular training on the incidence of knee injury in female athletes. A prospec-
tive study. Am J Sports Med. 1999;27:699-706.

5. Hurd WJ, Chmielewski TL, Snyder-Mackler L. Perturbation-enhanced neu-
romuscular training alters muscle activity in female athletes. Knee Surg
Sports Traumatol Arthrosc. 2006;14:60-69.

6.  Mandelbaum BR, Silvers HJ, Watanabe DS, et al. Effectiveness of a neuro-
muscular and proprioceptive training program in preventing anterior cruci-
ate ligament injuries in female athletes: 2-year follow-up. Am J Sports Med.
2005;33:1003-1010.

7.  Myer GD, Ford KR, McLean SG, Hewett TE. The effects of plyometric versus
dynamic stabilization and balance training on lower extremity biomechan-
ics. Am J Sports Med. 2006;34:445-455.

8.  Myer GD, Ford KR, Palumbo JP, Hewett TE. Neuromuscular training im-
proves performance and lower-extremity biomechanics in female athletes.
J Strength Cond Res. 2005;19:51-60.

9.  Onate JA, Guskiewicz KM, Marshall SW, Giuliani C, Yu B, Garrett WE.
Instruction of jump-landing technique using videotape feedback: altering
lower extremity motion patterns. Am J Sports Med. 2005;33:831-842.

10. Petersen W, Braun C, Bock W, et al. A controlled prospective case
control study of a prevention training program in female team hand-
ball players: the German experience. Arch Orthop Trauma Surg.

2005;125:614-621.

11. Petibois C, Deleris G. Effects of short- and long-term detraining on
the metabolic response to endurance exercise. Int J Sports Med.
2003;24:320-325.

12. Pollard CD, Sigward SM, Ota S, Langford K, Powers CM. The influence of
in-season injury prevention training on lower-extremity kinematics during
landing in female soccer players. Clin J Sport Med. 2006;16:223-227.

13. Trowbridge CA, Ricard MD, Knight KL, Hopkins JT, Draper DO, Hilton
SC. The effects of strength and plyometric training on joint position and

joint moments of the female knee [abstract]. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther.

2007;37:A25.

sTruCTuraL FaCTors

What We know

1.  Female ACL is smaller in length, cross-sectional area, and
volume when compared to male.4 The difference persists
even after adjusting for body anthropometry.

2. Notch height is smaller and notch angle larger in the male
population when compared to the female population (these
differences may influence the notch impingement theory).4

3.  Notch width is a good predictor of ACL size (area and
volume) in men but not in women. Notch angle is a good
predictor of ACL size in females but not in males.4

4. The female ACL is less stiff (lower modulus of elasticity)
and fails at a lower load level (lower failure strength).3
These differences persist even after adjusting for age,
body anthropometrics, and ACL size. The lower stiffness
of the female ACL generally supports the higher observed
laxity of the female knee.

5.  The ultrastructural analysis of the ACL shows that the
percent of the area occupied by collagen fiber (area of col-
lagen fibers/total area of the micrograph) is lower in fe-
male when adjusted for age and body anthropometrics.5

What We don’t know

1. The impact of activity level on the strength and properties
of the ACL.

2. The impact of exercise and weight training on the laxity of
the knee. Results of current studies1,6,8,9 are inconclusive.

3. The impact of meniscus geometry on ACL strain during
activity.

4. Which activities (cutting, jumping, stop-jumping, etc)
cause the highest load and strain on the ACL. The few
studies that have been conducted are inconclusive.2,7,11

Where do We Go From Here

1.  Determine whether we can simulate ACL failure in the
laboratory environment under physiological loading.

2.  Demonstrate how the ACL and the overall knee joint
behave under different dynamic conditions.

3. Investigate the relationship between muscle-strength-
ening programs and ACL response to such programs
through knee laxity measurements.

journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy | volume 37 | number  | 
february 007 | a 



reFerenCes

1.  Belanger MJ, Moore DC, Crisco JJ, 3rd, Fadale PD, Hulstyn MJ, Ehrlich MG.
Knee laxity does not vary with the menstrual cycle, before or after exercise.
Am J Sports Med. 2004;32:1150-1157.

2.  Cerulli G, Benoit DL, Lamontagne M, Caraffa A, Liti A. In vivo anterior 
cruci-
ate ligament strain behaviour during a rapid deceleration movement: case
report. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc. 2003;11:307-311.

3.  Chandrashekar N, Mansouri H, Slauterbeck J, Hashemi J. Sex-based differ-
ences in the tensile properties of the human anterior cruciate ligament. J
Biomech. 2006;39:2943-2950.

4. Chandrashekar N, Slauterbeck J, Hashemi J. Sex-based differences in the
anthropometric characteristics of the anterior cruciate ligament and its
relation to intercondylar notch geometry: a cadaveric study. Am J Sports
Med. 2005;33:1492-1498.

5.  Hashemi J, Chandrashekar N, Mansouri H, Hardy DM, Slauterbeck JR. Ul-
trastructure, Size, and Material Properties of the Human Anterior Cruciate
Ligament: A Sex-Based Assessment [abstract]. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther.
2007;37:A31.

6.  Nawata K, Teshima R, Morio Y, Hagino H, Enokida M, Yamamoto K. An-
terior-posterior knee laxity increased by exercise. Quantitative evalua-
tion of physiologic changes. Acta Orthop Scand. 1999;70:261-264.

7.  Shin CS, Chaudhari AM, Andriacchi TP. The influence of deceleration forces
on ACL strain during single-leg landing: A simulation study. J Biomech.
2006;

8.  Skinner HB, Wyatt MP, Stone ML, Hodgdon JA, Barrack RL. Exercise-related
knee joint laxity. Am J Sports Med. 1986;14:30-34.

9.  Steele JR, Milburn PD, Roger GJ. Warm-up effect on active and pas-
sive arthrometric assessment of knee laxity. Arch Phys Med Rehabil.
1999;80:829-836.

10. Steiner ME, Grana WA, Chillag K, Schelberg-Karnes E. The effect of exercise
on anterior-posterior knee laxity. Am J Sports Med. 1986;14:24-29.

11. Withrow TJ, Huston LJ, Wojtys EM, Ashton-Miller JA. The effect of an
impulsive knee valgus moment on in vitro relative ACL strain during a
simulated jump landing. Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon). 2006;21:977-983.

HorMonaL FaCTors

What We know

1.  The mechanical and molecular properties of the ACL are
likely influenced by, not only estrogen, but by the inter-
action of several sex hormones, secondary messengers,
remodeling proteins, and stresses.7,10,11,13,16,19,20

2. There is a time dependency effect for sex hormones and
other remodeling agents to influence a change in ACL
tissue characteristics.7,11

3. There are receptors for estrogen and testosterone in the
anterior cruciate ligament.6,7

What We don’t know

1.  How do ACL injury rates vary in women using oral
contraceptives?

2. Do sex hormones have effects on different types of tissues
(eg, muscle, tendons etc.) that can also increase injury
risk?

3. What are the interactions between mechanical stress,
hormones, and altered ACL structure?

4. What are the ACL injury risks in women with abnormal
menstrual cycles?

5.  Are there genetic differences in the structural and mo-
lecular properties of the ACL that predispose women or
certain women to ACL injury?

6. The time course of collagen remodeling from expres-
sion of mRNA and protein to measurable changes in the
strength of the ligament.

7. How does the interaction of hormonal fluctuations
during the menstrual cycle affect the neuromuscular
control?

Where do We Go From Here?

1. Further study characteristics of the ACL and ACL injury
risk in oral contraceptive users. The type of contraceptive
should be documented, and both the endogenous and ex-
ogenous levels of sex hormones examined.

2. In future analyses, there is a need to focus more on indi-
vidual results, rather than mean values as there is much
variability in individual menstrual cycle characteristics.

3. Develop improved methods of measuring individual hor-
mone profiles, need to test more subjects, need to verify
phases of the cycle with some levels of hormones, need to
consider all relevant hormones to include estrogen, pro-
gesterone, and possibly others.

4. Define the mechanisms by which sex hormones mediate
gender-specific differences in collagen remodeling and
ACL strength.

5. Develop precise methods of measuring hormone profiles

across all phases of the menstrual cycle in conjunction
with objective indices of neuromuscular control. t

reFerenCes

1.  Arendt EA, Bershadsky B, Agel J. Periodicity of noncontact anterior cruci-
ate ligament injuries during the menstrual cycle. J Gend Specif Med.
2002;5:19-26.

2.  Deie M, Sakamaki Y, Sumen Y, Urabe Y, Ikuta Y. Anterior knee lax-
ity in young women varies with their menstrual cycle. Int Orthop.
2002;26:154-156.

3.  Fleming BC, Beynnon BD, Nichols CE, Johnson RJ, Pope MH. An in vivo
comparison of anterior tibial translation and strain in the anteromedial
band of the anterior cruciate ligament. J Biomech. 1993;26:51-58.

4.  Heitz NA, Eisenman PA, Beck CL, Walker JA. Hormonal Changes Through-
out the Menstrual Cycle and Increased Anterior Cruciate Ligament Laxity
in Females. J Athl Train. 1999;34:144-149.

5.  Liu SH, al-Shaikh R, Panossian V, et al. Primary immunolocalization of
estrogen and progesterone target cells in the human anterior cruciate
ligament. J Orthop Res. 1996;14:526-533.

6.  Liu SH, Al-Shaikh RA, Panossian V, Finerman GA, Lane JM. Estrogen
affects the cellular metabolism of the anterior cruciate ligament. A
potential explanation for female athletic injury. Am J Sports Med.
1997;25:704-709.

7.  Lovering RM, Romani WA. Effect of testosterone on the female anterior
cruciate ligament. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2005;289:
R15-22.

8. Martineau PA, Al-Jassir F, Lenczner E, Burman ML. Effect of the
oral contraceptive pill on ligamentous laxity. Clin J Sport Med.
2004;14:281-286.

9. Rau MD, Renouf D, Benfield D, et al. Examination of the failure proper-



ties of the anterior cruciate ligament during the estrous cycle. Knee.

2005;12:37-40.

10. Romani W, Patrie J, Curl LA, Flaws JA. The correlations between estradiol,
estrone, estriol, progesterone, and sex hormone-binding globulin and
anterior cruciate ligament stiffness in healthy, active females. J Womens
Health (Larchmt). 2003;12:287-298.

11. Shultz SJ, Kirk SE, Johnson ML, Sander TC, Perrin DH. Relationship be-
tween sex hormones and anterior knee laxity across the menstrual cycle.
Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2004;36:1165-1174.

12. Slauterbeck J, Clevenger C, Lundberg W, Burchfield DM. Estrogen level
alters the failure load of the rabbit anterior cruciate ligament. J Orthop
Res. 1999;17:405-408.

13. Slauterbeck JR, Hickox JR, Beynnon B, Hardy DM. Anterior cruciate liga-
ment biology and its relationship to injury forces. Orthop Clin North Am.
2006;37:585-591.

14. Slauterbeck JR, Pankratz K, Xu KT, Bozeman SC, Hardy DM. Canine ovar-
iohysterectomy and orchiectomy increases the prevalence of ACL injury.
Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2004;301-305.

15. Strickland SM, Belknap TW, Turner SA, Wright TM, Hannafin JA. Lack of

hormonal influences on mechanical properties of sheep knee ligaments.

Am J Sports Med. 2003;31:210-215.

16. Tipton CM, Tcheng TK, Mergner W. Ligamentous strength
measurements from hypophysectomized rats. Am J Physiol.
1971;221:1144-1150.

17. Wreje U, Brynhildsen J, Aberg H, Bystrom B, Hammar M, von Schoultz

B. Collagen metabolism markers as a reflection of bone and soft tissue
turnover during the menstrual cycle and oral contraceptive use. Contra-
ception. 2000;61:265-270.

18. Yu WD, Liu SH, Hatch JD, Panossian V, Finerman GA. Effect of estrogen on
cellular metabolism of the human anterior cruciate ligament. Clin Orthop
Relat Res. 1999;229-238.

19. Yu WD, Panossian V, Hatch JD, Liu SH, Finerman GA. Combined effects of
estrogen and progesterone on the anterior cruciate ligament. Clin Orthop
Relat Res. 2001;268-281.

20. Zazulak BT, Paterno M, Myer GD, Romani WA, Hewett TE. The effects of
the menstrual cycle on anterior knee laxity: a systematic review. Sports
Med. 2006;36:847-862.

journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy | volume 37 | number  | 
february 007 | a7


ACL Supplement: Keynotes

AntonIe J. (ton) vAn den BogeRt1 • Scott g. McLeAn1

keynote address i

ACL Injuries: Do We Know the
Mechanisms?

njuries of the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) remain a frequent occurrence in 
many
sports activities. Recent research has identified risk factors, and prevention 
strategies are
being developed based on these findings. There is, however, still a limited 
understanding
of the actual injury mechanisms. In this presentation we will review the 
current knowledge

on ACL injury mechanisms, and identify needs and opportunities for further 
research.


Risk Factors and Prevention

Inspired by the well-known gender difference in ACL in-
jury risk, numerous studies were designed to test for gender
differences in anatomical and neuromuscular variables that
have been proposed as risk factors. Some of the key anatomi-
cal findings were that females have a smaller intercondylar
notch, smaller ACL, lower muscle strength.1 In movement
analysis studies, it was found that females perform sports
movements with less knee flexion and more knee valgus.13
As there are many gender differences in anatomy and neuro-
muscular control that are not related to ACL injury, conclu-
sions from these studies often rely less on the data than on a
good prior understanding of ACL injury mechanisms.

Stronger study designs are obtained when proposed risk
factors are correlated to actual injury risk within athletes of
the same gender. Key risk factors identified by these stud-
ies were: joint laxity, intercondylar notch width, body mass
index,12 maximal knee flexion during landing, and initial and
maximal knee valgus.5 Before incorporating these findings
into prevention programs, some caution is advised. Statisti-
cal analysis will detect association, not necessarily causation.
Unless we understand the mechanism of injury well, we do
not know whether an abnormal movement pattern, found to
be associated with ACL injury risk, might in fact be a desir-

able neuromuscular adaptation of the athlete to compensate
for an intrinsic risk, such as abnormal joint laxity.

Injury Mechanisms

A proper understanding of injury mechanisms requires 2
components: (1) failure load for the tissue or structure, and

(2) the load placed upon the tissue or structure during the
movements of interest.

The sagittal plane injury mechanism is well understood.
About 2000 N of force is required to tear the ACL. In the sag-
ittal plane, ACL force is nearly equal to the anterior drawer
force acting on the tibia, and hence, we typically use 2000 N
of anterior load as an injury criterion for the sagittal plane
mechanism. The main contributor to this anterior force
is the patellar tendon, especially near full extension. This
quadriceps-induced anterior drawer force is counteracted
by the hamstrings, and by the ground reaction force (except
in skiing). This injury mechanism was theoretically known
but only recently demonstrated in a cadaver model.2 In vivo
experiments are not possible, but forward dynamic com-
puter simulation is an increasingly viable alternative. Such
simulations have demonstrated that the sagittal plane injury
mechanism can occur in skiing4 but not in cutting, landing,
and pivoting movements.6 These findings can be explained

1 Department of Biomedical Engineering, Orthopaedic Research Center, Cleveland 
Clinic Foundation, OH

a | february 2007 | volume 37 | number 2 | journal of orthopaedic & sports 
physical therapy


ACL Supplement: Keynotes


by the dynamic relationships between musculoskeletal forces
and movements during sports activities.

Observations of ACL injury events often suggest that there
is substantial nonsagittal loading, such as valgus and rota-
tional moments.8 There is limited knowledge of their impact
on ACL injury. Early cadaver experiments showed that injury
can occur at 125 to 210 Nm of valgus torque or 35 to 80 Nm
of internal rotation torque,11 but there is no comparable data
on more complex loading conditions. During isolated ACL
injuries, external rotation and valgus are often seen in combi-
nation, and this is counterintuitive to the understanding that
the ACL is only loaded during internal rotation. This particu-
lar injury mechanism may be related to impingement of the
ACL on the lateral wall of the intercondylar notch, as recently
shown by Fung et al.3 A narrow notch and lax knee would
directly contribute to this mechanism. A complicating factor
in cadaveric models is that knee joint loading is described by
6 independent variables and a full understanding requires
systematic exploration of a large number of load combina-
tions. Such cadaveric studies have been done, to some extent,
in subfailure conditions, but extrapolation to much higher
injurious loads may not be feasible. Direct observation of
ACL failure can only be done once in each specimen, and
this has rarely been done, with some exceptions.1,11 There is
limited knowledge of valgus loading during sports activities.
In laboratory studies, valgus moments typically remain well
below injury levels.7 In forward dynamic computer simula-
tions, random variations in neuromuscular control can cause
valgus moments to rise above injurious levels.6 These simula-
tions also demonstrated that females have a higher probabil-
ity of excessive valgus loading than males.

computational Modeling

Forward dynamics models have provided a basic under-
standing of injury mechanisms but are still limited in their
ability to fully represent the effects of musculoskeletal dy-
namics on ACL injuries. Because of limitations in computer
speed, only 1 limb was modeled, the knee was represented
by a hinge, the foot is rigid.6 A next generation of movement
simulations should overcome these limitations.

The limitations of cadaveric injury models can be over-
come by further development of computational joint models.
Generic models already exist and have been used to simulate
ACL reconstruction techniques9 and ACL loading during
noninjurious movements,10 but not to simulate ACL injury
events. Once validated against cadaveric experiments, these

computational models can be injured again and again until
the mechanisms are understood. Computational joint mod-
els can eventually incorporate subject-specific joint geometry
and tissue properties, and can become a tool for evaluation
of the intrinsic risk factors. The long-term goal can be that a
personalized strategy is developed in which neuromuscular
factors and protective equipment are designed for an indi-
vidual athlete to eliminate injury risk with consideration of
their intrinsic risk factors and with minimal impact on sports
performance. t

ReFeRenceS

1. Anderson AF, Dome DC, Gautam S, Awh MH, Rennirt GW. Correlation of an-
thropometric measurements, strength, anterior cruciate ligament size, and
intercondylar notch characteristics to sex differences in anterior cruciate 
liga-
ment tear rates. Am J Sports Med. 2001;29:58-66.

2. DeMorat G, Weinhold P, Blackburn T, Chudik S, Garrett W. Aggressive quadri-
ceps loading can induce noncontact anterior cruciate ligament injury. Am J
Sports Med. 2004;32:477-483.

3. Fung DT, Zhang LQ. Modeling of ACL impingement against the intercondylar
notch. Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon). 2003;18:933-941.

4. Gerritsen KG, Nachbauer W, van den Bogert AJ. Computer simulation of
landing movement in downhill skiing: anterior cruciate ligament injuries. J
Biomech. 1996;29:845-854.

5. Hewett TE, Myer GD, Ford KR, et al. Biomechanical measures of neuromus-
cular control and valgus loading of the knee predict anterior cruciate liga-
ment injury risk in female athletes: a prospective study. Am J Sports Med.
2005;33:492-501.

6. McLean SG, Huang X, Su A, Van Den Bogert AJ. Sagittal plane biomechanics
cannot injure the ACL during sidestep cutting. Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon).
2004;19:828-838.

7. McLean SG, Huang X, van den Bogert AJ. Association between lower extrem-
ity posture at contact and peak knee valgus moment during sidestepping:
implications for ACL injury. Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon). 2005;20:863-870.

8. Olsen OE, Myklebust G, Engebretsen L, Bahr R. Injury mechanisms for anterior
cruciate ligament injuries in team handball: a systematic video analysis. Am
J Sports Med. 2004;32:1002-1012.

9. Pena E, Calvo B, Martinez MA, Palanca D, Doblare M. Influence of the tunnel
angle in ACL reconstructions on the biomechanics of the knee joint. Clin
Biomech (Bristol, Avon). 2006;21:508-516.

10. Pollard CD, Davis IM, Hamill J. Influence of gender on hip and knee mechan-
ics during a randomly cued cutting maneuver. Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon).
2004;19:1022-1031.

11. Seering WP, Piziali RL, Nagel DA, Schurman DJ. The function of the pri-
mary ligaments of the knee in varus-valgus and axial rotation. J Biomech.
1980;13:785-794.

12. Uhorchak JM, Scoville CR, Williams GN, Arciero RA, St Pierre P, Taylor DC. 
Risk
factors associated with noncontact injury of the anterior cruciate ligament: a
prospective four-year evaluation of 859 West Point cadets. Am J Sports Med.
2003;31:831-842.

13. Yu B, McClure SB, Onate JA, Guskiewicz KM, Kirkendall DT, Garrett WE. Age
and gender effects on lower extremity kinematics of youth soccer players in
a stop-jump task. Am J Sports Med. 2005;33:1356-1364.

journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy | volume 37 | number 2 | 
february 2007 | a 


ACL Supplement: Keynotes

William E. GarrETT, MD, PhD1 • BinG Yu, PhD2

keynote address ii

Anterior Cruciate Ligament Injury
Mechanisms and Risk Factors

he research effort to determine risk factors of sustaining noncontact ACL 
injuries is increasing
as the concerns of increased incidents and cost for treatment, and serious 
consequences of non-
contact ACL injuries are growing. Prospective cohort studies are commonly used 
epidemiological
research designs for determining risk factors of injuries and diseases, and are 
being used in
determining risk factors of sustaining noncontact ACL injuries. The results of 
epidemiological studies
with cohort designs, however, are descriptive in nature and lack 
cause-and-effect relationship between
identified risk factors and the injury. Without a good understanding of the 
injury mechanisms, the


risk factors of sustaining noncontact ACL injuries identified
from epidemiological studies could be misinterpreted and lead
to the selection of nonoptimal injury prevention programs.

Current literature shows that proximal tibia anterior shear
force, valgus/varus moment, and internal/external rotation
moments are 3 possible ACL loading mechanisms. Several in
vitro studies demonstrate that proximal tibia anterior shear
force significantly affect ACL loading, while knee valgus, var-
us, and internal rotation moments have significant effects on
ACL loading only when proximal tibia shear force is applied.
In vitro studies also demonstrate that ACL loading decreases
as knee flexion angle increases. In vivo studies demonstrate
that ACL strain significantly increases as proximal tibia an-
terior shear force increases under a weight bearing condition
but has essentially no responses to knee valgus, varus, and
external rotation moment loading. These studies suggest that
proximal tibia anterior shear force is the major ACL loading
mechanisms. This indicates that sagittal plane biomechanical
factors such as excessive quadriceps muscle force, small knee
flexion angle, and large posterior ground reaction force may
be major risk factors of sustaining noncontact ACL injuries.
Excessive quadriceps muscle force can result in great pa-

tella tendon force and proximal tibial anterior shear force to
load the ACL. A recent cadaver study shows that a 4500-N
quadriceps muscle force at 20° knee flexion angle can result
in complete or partial ACL tears, and in significant increase
in knee anterior laxity. Small knee flexion angle can increase
ACL loading by increasing patella tendon-tibia shaft angle
and ACL elevation angle. Recent studies demonstrate that
patella tendon-tibia shaft angle and ACL elevation angle in-
crease as knee flexion angle decrease. Increased patella ten-
don-tibia shaft angle would increase proximal tibia anterior
shears, thus increase ACL loading. Increased ACL elevation
angle increases ACL axial loading with a constant proximal
tibia anterior shear force. Increased peak posterior ground
reaction force increases knee extension moment demand and
quadriceps muscle force. Increased quadriceps muscle force
would increase ACL loading. A recent study demonstrates
that peak ACL loading occurs at peak impact ground reac-
tion forces.

Literature also shows that individuals at high risk of sus-
taining noncontact ACL injuries have smaller knee flexion
angle during athletic tasks than individuals at low risk do.
Epidemiological studies show that female athletes are at

1 Sports Medicine Center, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC. 2Center 
for Human Movement Science, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel 
Hill, NC

a10 | february 2007 | volume 37 | number 2 | journal of orthopaedic & sports 
physical therapy


ACL Supplement: Keynotes


higher risk of sustaining noncontact ACL injuries than their
male counterpart do. Recent biomechanical studies dem-
onstrated that female recreational athletes exhibited small
knee flexion angles in running, jumping, and cutting tasks.
Studies also demonstrate that female adolescent athletes had
a sharply increased ACL injury rate after 13 years of age. A
recent biomechanical study showed that female adolescent
soccer players started decreasing their knee flexion angle
during a stop-jump task after 13 years of age. These results
combined together suggest that small knee flexion angle dur-
ing landing tasks may be a risk factor of sustaining noncon-
tact ACL injuries.

Literature shows that individuals at a high risk of sus-
taining noncontact ACL injuries have greater peak poste-
rior ground reaction forces in athletic tasks. Recent studies
showed that female recreational athletes had greater peak
impact posterior ground reaction force, peak resultant proxi-
mal tibia anterior shear force, and peak knee joint resultant
extension moment during landings of stop jump tasks than
did male recreational athletes. The resultant peak proximal
tibia anterior shear force was positively correlated to the peak
posterior ground reaction force, and ACL loading.

A recent epidemiological study revealed an association of
knee valgus moment loading with ACL injuries. The interpre-
tation of this association, however, needs to be cautious. The
literature demonstrates that knee valgus moment loading
does not significantly affect ACL loading unless a significant
proximal tibia anterior shear force is applied. The literature
also demonstrates that the cruciate ligaments are not major
knee valgus-varus moment bearing structure when the collat-
eral ligaments are intact. The literature further demonstrates
that it would be unlikely to have a complete ACL rupture
due to knee valgus moment loading alone without a com-
plete MCL rupture. Future studies are needed to understand

the roles of nonsagittal plane biomechanics in ACL injury
mechanisms and risk factors. t

rEFErEnCES

1. Bendjaballah MZ, Shirazi-Adl A, Zukor DJ. Finite element analysis of human
knee joint in varus-valgus. Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon). 1997;12:139-148.

2. Berns GS, Hull ML, Patterson HA. Strain in the anteromedial bundle of
the anterior cruciate ligament under combination loading. J Orthop Res.
1992;10:167-176.

3. Cerulli G, Benoit DL, Lamontagne M, Caraffa A, Liti A. In vivo anterior 
cruci-
ate ligament strain behaviour during a rapid deceleration movement: case
report. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc. 2003;11:307-311.

4. Chappell JD, Yu B, Kirkendall DT, Garrett WE. A comparison of knee kinetics
between male and female recreational athletes in stop-jump tasks. Am J
Sports Med. 2002;30:261-267.

5. DeMorat G, Weinhold P, Blackburn T, Chudik S, Garrett W. Aggressive quad-
riceps loading can induce noncontact anterior cruciate ligament injury. Am
J Sports Med. 2004;32:477-483.

6. Fleming BC, Renstrom PA, Beynnon BD, et al. The effect of weightbear-
ing and external loading on anterior cruciate ligament strain. J Biomech.
2001;34:163-170.

7. Hewett TE, Myer GD, Ford KR, et al. Biomechanical measures of neuromus-
cular control and valgus loading of the knee predict anterior cruciate liga-
ment injury risk in female athletes: a prospective study. Am J Sports Med.
2005;33:492-501.

8. Li G, Defrate LE, Rubash HE, Gill TJ. In vivo kinematics of the ACL during
weight-bearing knee flexion. J Orthop Res. 2005;23:340-344.

9. Malinzak RA, Colby SM, Kirkendall DT, Yu B, Garrett WE. A comparison of
knee joint motion patterns between men and women in selected athletic
tasks. Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon). 2001;16:438-445.

10. Markolf KL, Burchfield DM, Shapiro MM, Shepard MF, Finerman GA, Slauter-
beck JL. Combined knee loading states that generate high anterior cruciate
ligament forces. J Orthop Res. 1995;13:930-935.

11. Matsumoto H, Suda Y, Otani T, Niki Y, Seedhom BB, Fujikawa K. Roles of the
anterior cruciate ligament and the medial collateral ligament in preventing
valgus instability. J Orthop Sci. 2001;6:28-32.

12. Mazzocca AD, Nissen CW, Geary M, Adams DJ. Valgus medial collateral
ligament rupture causes concomitant loading and damage of the anterior
cruciate ligament. J Knee Surg. 2003;16:148-151.

13. Nunley RM, Wright DW, Renner JB, Yu B, Garrett WE. Gender comparison
of patella-tendon tibial shaft angle with weight bearing. Res Sports Med.
2003;11:173-185.

14. van den Bogert AJ, McLean SG, Yu B, Chappell JJ, Garrett WE. Authors’
response. Am J Sports Med. 2006;37:312-315.

15. Yu B, Lin CF, Garrett WE. Lower extremity biomechanics during the landing
of a stop-jump task. Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon). 2006;21:297-305.

journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy | volume 37 | number 2 | 
february 2007 | a11


ACL Supplement: Abstracts

ACL Injuries—The Gender Bias
Abstracts


KINEMATIC AND KINETIC DIFFERENCES BETWEEN MALE AND FEMALE
SOCCER PLAYERS

McKean K, Landry S, Hubley-Kozey C, Deluzio K, Stanish W
School of Biomedical Engineering, School of Physiotherapy, Dalhousie
University, Halifax, Canada; Department of Surgery, Division of Ortho-
paedics, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Canada

INTRODuCTION: Anterior cruciate ligament injuries occur 2 to 8 times

more often in females than males.1,2 Over 70% of these injuries occur
in a noncontact situation including cutting, pivoting, and landing from
a jump.3 The purpose of this study was to detect differences in kinetics
and kinematics during cutting maneuvers that may contribute to this
gender predisposition.

METhODS: Twenty elite male and 20 elite female soccer players between
the ages of 14 to 18 years underwent a complete 3-D kinematic, kinetic,
and electomyographic (EMG) analysis of the lower limb during unantic-
ipated running and cutting maneuvers. Hip, knee, and ankle angles and
moments were collected during the stance phase of each maneuver. Sub-
jects were instructed to run down the walkway of the lab at 3.5  0.2 m/

s. Just prior to their right foot landing on the force plate, a light system

randomly directed the individuals to either (1) cut to the left (side-cut),

(2) continue running straight, or (3) cut to the right (cross-cut) until 5
successful trials were obtained for each direction. All cutting maneuvers
were made at a 45° to 60° angle. The kinematic and kinetic waveforms
for the entire stance phase of each task were analyzed using principal
component analysis.4

RESuLTS: There was no significant difference between males and fe-
males in age, body mass index (BMI), years of soccer experience, or
speed of the cutting maneuvers. However, the males were significant-
ly taller and heavier than the females (P,.01). For the cross-cut and

side-cut conditions females exhibited less hip flexion than males (P =

.01). In the cross-cut maneuver females exhibited a larger knee adduc-
tion moment (P = .03) than males. When the moments were normal-
ized to both body mass and height the females still exhibited a larg-
er knee adduction moment than males. However, using an ANCOVA
model with height and weight as covariates height was significantly
related to the adduction moment (P = .02) and weight was borderline
significant (P = .06). Athletes that were taller and heavier had a small-
er  knee adduction moment.

DISCuSSION: Anthropometric differences between males and females
help explain some of the biomechanical differences between the 2
groups during cutting maneuvers. It has been hypothesized by oth-
ers that young athletes may exhibit altered biomechanics during mat-
uration due to increased limb growth without adequate neuromus-
cular development.5 While this is a hypothesis at this point we have
found biomechanical differences that are affected by anthropomet-
ric differences between male and female soccer players at a high
risk age.

CONCLuSIONS: Kinematic and kinetic differences exist between males and
females during cutting maneuvers. Females cut with less hip flexion. Fe-
males also exhibit a larger knee adduction moment both when normal-
ized to body mass and body mass times height. This difference was not
due to gender alone, but was influenced by differences in height and
weight between the groups.

REFERENCES:

1. Arendt E, Dick R. Knee injury patterns among men and women in collegiate
basketball and soccer. NCAA data and review of literature. Am J Sports Med.
1995;23:694-701.

2. Elias SR. 10-year trend in USA Cup soccer injuries: 1988-1997. Med Sci 
Sports Ex-
erc. 2001;33:359-367.

3. Nyland JA, Shapiro R, Stine RL, Horn TS, Ireland ML. Relationship of 
fatigued run
and rapid stop to ground reaction forces, lower extremity kinematics, and muscle
activation. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 1994;20:132-137.

4. Deluzio KJ, Wyss UP, Costigan PA, Sorbie C, Zee B. Principal component models
of knee kinematics and kinetics - normal vs pathological gait patterns. Hum 
Move-
ment Sci. 1999;16:201-217.

5. Hewett TE, Myer GD, Ford KR. Decrease in neuromuscular control about the knee
with maturation in female athletes. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2004;86-A:1601-1608.

LOADING ChARACTERISTICS OF FEMALES WhO EXhIBIT EXCESSIVE VALGuS MO-
MENTS DuRING SIDE-STEP CuTTING

Sigward SM, Powers CM

Musculoskeletal Biomechanics Research Laboratory, Department of
Biokinesiology and Physical Therapy, University of Southern California,
Los Angles, CA

INTRODuCTION: Although excessive knee valgus moments are considered

a risk factor for non contact anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) injuries
in female athletes, little is known about the biomechanical factors that
contribute to this loading pattern. The purpose of this study was to com-
pare lower extremity kinematics, foot position, and ground reaction forc-
es (GRF) between female soccer players who demonstrate normal frontal
plane moments with those who demonstrate excessive frontal plane mo-
ments at the knee during a cutting task.

METhODS: Sixty-one female soccer players between the ages of 14 and 18,
with no history of ACL injury, participated. Each performed a side-step
cutting maneuver at a speed of 5.5 to 7.0 m/s by planting their right foot
and changing direction to the left at a 45° angle. Anthropometric data,
3-D knee kinematics (6 camera, VICON Motion System, 120 Hz), and
ground reaction forces (AMTI force plate, 2400 Hz) were used to cal-
culate frontal plane moments at the knee (inverse dynamics equations).
Peak knee frontal plane moments during the early deceleration phase of
the cut cycle (0%-20%) were used to place subjects into normal and ex-
cessive valgus moment groups. The definition of excessive valgus mo-
ments was based on previous work in our laboratory evaluating male col-
legiate soccer players performing the same side-step cutting task. Females

a12 | february 2007 | volume 37 | number 2 | journal of orthopaedic & sports 
physical therapy


ACL Supplement: Abstracts


FIGuRE 1. (Sigward and Powers)

FIGuRE 2. (Sigward and Powers)

INTERSEGMENTAL FORCE

INTERSEGMENTAL
FORCE

ing strategy than those who exhibit normal knee frontal plane moments.
While it is not known why a particular strategy would be chosen, it is ap-
parent that these patterns differ in their effect on the knee joint. For ex-
ample, after accounting for the forces and moments acting at the foot
segment, a laterally directed GRF would impose a laterally directed in-
tersegmental force at the distal tibia (FIGuRE 1). In addition, the combi-
nation  of greater degrees of hip abduction and internal rotation would
position the center of pressure further from the center of mass of the tib-
ia thereby creating a larger moment arm for the vertical intersegmen-
tal force at the distal tibia (FIGuRE 2). Together, a large laterally directed
ground reaction force and increased hip abduction and internal rota-
tion would create a greater valgus moment about the center of mass of
the tibia.

CONCLuSIONS: These results provide insight into potentially injurious
loading strategies and support the premise that interventions designed
to encourage loading of the lower extremity in a more neutral alignment
may work to decrease frontal plane loading at the knee.

GENDER DIFFERENCES IN KNEE JOINT TORSIONAL STIFFNESS DuRING A SIDE-STEP
CuTTING MANEuVER

Pollard CD, Sigward SM, Powers CM

Musculoskeletal Biomechanics Research Laboratory, University of South-
ern California, Los Angeles, CA

INTRODuCTION: Female athletes participating in cutting and jumping

sports have been reported to have a 4 to 6 times greater chance of tearing
their anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) than their male counterparts.1 Nu-
merous investigators have attributed this increased incidence of injury in
females to gender differences in lower extremity mechanics. The major-
ity  of these studies have examined gender differences in knee joint kine-
matics, joint moments, or muscle activation patterns. It has recently been
suggested that decreased leg or knee stiffness may contribute to ACL and
other soft tissue injuries.3,4 Because it is known that noncontact ACL in-
jury often occurs as an athlete is decelerating and/or changing direction,2
it may be important to better understand gender differences in knee joint
stiffness during such an activity. Therefore, the purpose of this study was
to investigate gender differences in sagittal knee joint torsional stiffness
during the initial loading phase of a side-step cutting maneuver.

METhODS: Participants consisted of 15 female and 15 male collegiate soc-
cer players that were NCAA Division I or II athletes. All were healthy
with no current complaints of lower extremity injury. Subjects were in-
structed to run 5 meters at a speed of 5.5 to 7.0 m/s before contacting
their right foot on the force plate and then change direction to the left.
Cones placed at 35° and 55° from the original direction of progression


who exhibited a valgus knee moment that was greater than 2 standard
deviations from the average male frontal plane moment of 0.006  0.3
Nm/kg were placed in the excessive valgus moment group. Females with
a knee valgus moment below the 2-standard deviation threshold were

placed in the normal group. Average hip and knee angles in all 3 planes,
foot progression angle, and peak anterior /posterior, medial/lateral, and
vertical GRFs were identified during the first 20% of the cut cycle. To de-
termine if these variables differed between groups independent samples
t test were performed.

RESuLTS: The average valgus moment for the excessive valgus moment

group was 1.2  0.4 Nm/kg as compared to 0.2  0.2 Nm/kg for the
normal frontal plane moment group (P,.001). The subjects with ex-
cessive valgus moments demonstrated an initial loading pattern that
included greater laterally directed ground reaction forces (P,.01), in-
creased hip abduction (P = .02), increased hip internal rotation (P =

.01), and a more internally rotated foot progression angle (P = .04).
DISCuSSION: Our results illustrate that the female athletes who exhibit
excessive knee valgus moments during the early deceleration phase of
a side-step cutting maneuver utilize a different lower extremity load-

were used to direct the subjects to cut at an angle of 45°. Approach speed
was calculated with the use of a photoelectric switch and force plate con-
tact. Subjects completed 4 successful trials of the cutting maneuver. Vi-
con Clinical Manager software was used to quantify knee joint angles
and moments in the sagittal plane. All kinetic data were normalized to
body mass and net joint moments were calculated with standard inverse
dynamics equations. The angle and moment data were linearly interpo-
lated to 101 data points with each point representing 1% of the stance
phase (0%-100%). The average knee joint torsional stiffness was deter-
mined by calculating the slope of a regression line through the knee joint
moment versus knee joint angle data during the initial loading phase
(FIGuRE 1).3 The initial loading phase was defined as the time from heel
strike to peak sagittal knee joint moment. Independent t tests were used
to test for significant differences in knee joint torsional stiffness between
males and females as well as average knee flexion and knee extensor mo-
ments during a side-step cutting maneuver (P<.05).

RESuLTS: Females exhibited significantly decreased knee joint torsional

stiffness (7.01 Nm/deg) as compared to males (9.36 Nm/deg) during the
loading phase of the side-step cutting maneuver (P = .039) (FIGuRE 2).

journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy | volume 37 | number 2 | 
february 2007 | a13



4

3

� MOMENT

STIFFNESS =

2        � ANGLE

1

0

-1

0    10    20    30    40    50    60

KNEE FLEXION ANGLE (DEGREES)

FIGuRE 1. Example of knee torsional stiffness calculation (exemplar data taken 
from 1
female subject).

ASSOCIATIONS BETWEEN PLANNING TIME AND KINETIC VARIABLES DuRING AN
uNEXPECTED CuT TASKS

Houck J, De Haven K, Maloney M

Ithaca College, Rochester Campus, Rochester, NY; University of Rochester
Medical Center, Department of Orthopedics Rochester, NY

INTRODuCTION: During sports play quick movements such as cut tasks are

believed to place athletes at risk. Motor control responses to cued ad-
justments in direction influence neuromuscular control. Specific neuro-
muscular control strategies associated with cued adjustments may lead
to greater risk of anterior cruciate injury.1,2 In previous analyses, online
adjustments during an unexpected walking cut task led to a shift in the
knee moments toward adduction2 and greater plantar flexors moments.3
This analysis examines the relationship between changes in knee kinetic
variables (TABLE) due to anticipation and planning time during an unex-
pected walking cut task.


14      *

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

MALES       FEMALES

FIGuRE 2. Males exhibited significantly greater knee joint stiffness than 
females.

There were no significant differences in average knee flexion angles or
knee extensor moments during the loading phase of cutting.

DISCuSSION: Our results support the premise that gender differences in sag-
ittal knee joint torsional stiffness exist during the performance of a side-
step cutting maneuver. These findings are similar to those of Granata et al
(2002) who reported that females exhibited significantly lower leg stiff-
ness during a hopping task when compared to males. Interestingly, the
focus of ACL injury prevention programs contradicts this concept in that
females are taught “soft” landing techniques (ie, decreasing lower extrem-
ity stiffness). At this time it remains unclear how decreased stiffness could
predispose females to soft tissue injury; particularly in the current study
where there were no group differences in average knee flexion angles or ex-
tensor moments. However, because of the gender disparity in ACL injury,

Correlations of Selected Variables

VARIABLE/% STANCE INTERVAL       r VALuE  P VALuE

Change in Moments (SS-SSU)

Adduction (Nm/kg)/(0%–10%)         0.72    ,.01

Abduction (Nm/Kg)/(10%–30%)        0.50    .03

External Rotation (Nm/Kg)/(5%–30%)      0.52   ,.01

METhODS: Twenty healthy subjects (22.6  5.5 years old, 172.8  9.0 cm,
and 71.9  14.3 kg) participated in this study. Data were collected us-
ing an Optotrak Motion Analysis System (Northern Digital, Inc) and
force plate (Kistler) integrated with Motion Monitor Software (Innsport
Training, Inc) to generate kinetic variables. Position data were sampled
at 100 Hz and force and analogue data at 1000 Hz. Each testing ses-
sion included expected tasks, straight walking (ST), and 45° side-step
cut (SS), followed by a set of unexpected straight walking (STU) and un-
expected side-step cut (SSU) tasks in a random order. For all tasks speed
was maintained at 2 m/s. To assess the change due to anticipation, the
difference between peak variables of the SS and SSU task (SS-SSU) were
calculated. Planning time is defined in FIGuRE 1. Relationships between
the change in kinetic variables (TABLE) and planning time were examined
using SPSS 10.0.

RESuLTS: See TABLE.

DISCuSSION: The findings of this analysis suggest that planning time is mod-
erately correlated with frontal and transverse plane but not sagittal plane

1600


the results of this investigation combined with previous work4 suggest that
sagittal knee joint torsional stiffness may be an underlying factor related to
the increased incidence of ACL injury in female athletes.

CONCLuSIONS: In summary, the concept that increased knee joint stiffness
exhibited by males during the side-step cutting maneuver serves to pro-
tect the soft tissues of the knee joint, including the ACL, needs to be fur-
ther explored. In addition, future investigations are needed to examine
the influence of successful intervention programs on knee joint stiffness.

REFERENCES:

1. Arendt E, Dick R. Knee injury patterns among men and women in collegiate
basketball and soccer. NCAA data and review of literature. Am J Sports Med.
1995;23:694-701.

2. Boden BP, Dean GS, Feagin JA, Jr., Garrett WE, Jr. Mechanisms of anterior 
cruciate

-0.5

1200

800

400

0

0.5

PLANNING
TIME

VISUAL CUE

1.5

INITIAL
CONTACT
(GRF)

2.5


ligament injury. Orthopedics. 2000;23:573-578.

3. Butler RJ, Crowell HP, 3rd, Davis IM. Lower extremity stiffness: 
implications for per-
formance and injury. Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon). 2003;18:511-517.

-400

TIME (SECONDS)


4. Granata KP, Wilson SE, Padua DA. Gender differences in active musculoskeletal
stiffness. Part I. Quantification in controlled measurements of knee joint 
dynamics.
J Electromyogr Kinesiol. 2002;12:119-126.

FIGuRE 1. Subjects went straight or cut when given a visual cue to turn. 
Planning time
was the interval between an analogue signal synchronized with the light cue and 
initial
contact determined from the ground reaction force data.

a14 | february 2007 | volume 37 | number 2 | journal of orthopaedic & sports 
physical therapy



0.6

T  0.5

O

W

A  0.4

R

D

A  0.3

B
D

U  0.2

C

T

I  0.1

O

N

0

0

-0.1

NONPHYSIOLOGIC
RANGE

100    200    300    400

PLANNING TIME (ms)

ferences in absolute and relative joint energy dissipation were analyzed
with 2 (sex) × 3 ( joint) ANOVAs. Sex difference in total absolute joint en-
ergy dissipation was analyzed with an independent t test.

RESuLTS: Compared to males, females exhibited (1) less total lower body

energy dissipation –32.3  9.5 J·N–1×10–2 versus –24.7  8.1 J·N–1×10–2
(P,.05); and (2) a greater percentage of relative eccentric work at the
ankle 78.2%  12.9% versus 88.3%  12.3% (P,.05). There was also
a main effect for relative joint eccentric work with the ankle joint dissi-
pating significantly more energy (83.2%) than the hip (12.9%) or knee
(5.7%) (P,.05).

DISCuSSION: The observed sex differences in energetics support the notion
that females perform less eccentric work per unit of bodyweight during
landing and utilize an even greater ankle dominant strategy than males
to attenuate the vertical ground reaction impulse. In both males and fe-
males, the hip and knee joints dissipated less of the relative total energy


FIGuRE 2. The relationship between planning time and the change in peak 
abduction
moments (SS-SSU) is shown.

moments during early stance (TABLE). Near initial contact the shorter the
planning time the greater the shift in the knee moment toward abduction
(FIGuRE 2) and internal rotation. After foot flat the shorter the planning
time the greater the shift in the knee moment toward adduction. Because
a shift in the knee moment toward adduction is an identified component
of ACL injuries, planning time may significantly influence ACL injury risk.
Faster approach speeds may yield different correlations. These data sug-
gest how a slow speed task may contribute to ACL injury risk.

CONCLuSION: A component of the neuromuscular control strategy em-
ployed to make a quick adjustment may contribute to ACL risk.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS: Support from the Whitaker Foundation
(RG-02-0645).

REFERENCES:

1. Besier TF, Lloyd DG, Ackland TR, Cochrane JL. Anticipatory effects on knee
joint loading during running and cutting maneuvers. Med Sci Sports Exerc.
2001;33:1176-1181.

2. Houck HR, Duncan A, De Havenc KE. Comparison of frontal plane trunk 
kinematics
and hip and knee moments during anticipated and unanticipated walking and side
step cutting tasks. Gait Posture. 2006;24:314-322.

3. Houck HR, et al. Proceedings of the International Society of Biology. 
Cleveland, OH:
2005.

LOWER EXTREMITY ENERGETICS DIFFER BY SEX DuRING SINGLE-LEG
LANDINGS

Schmitz RJ, Kulas AS, Perrin DH, Riemann BL, Shultz SJ
University of North Carolina at Greensboro, Greensboro, NC; East Caro-
lina University, Greenville, NC; Georgia Southern University, Statesboro,
GA

INTRODuCTION: Biomechanical strategies that serve to decelerate the body

in the vertical direction have been implicated as contributing to ACL in-
jury. Investigations of energy dissipation strategies during landing may
provide insight into the global strategies that males and females use to
control the body’s momentum. We examined sex differences in hip, knee,
and ankle energy dissipation during single-leg landings.

METhODS: Recreationally active males (n = 14, 23.9  6.3 years, 79.0 

16.2 kg, 181.5  9.6 cm) and females (n = 14, 22.5  3.8 years, 53.5  5.6
kg, 164.5  7.6 cm) completed 5 single-leg landings from a 0.3 m height
onto a force platform while 3-dimensional kinematics and kinetics were

simultaneously collected. Using an inverse dynamics analysis, net joint
powers were calculated. To represent the eccentric work by each joint
complex, the negative portion of the joint power curve was integrated
and normalized to body weight. Total energy absorption was then calcu-
lated by summing the normalized hip, knee, and ankle values. Relative
hip, knee, and ankle eccentric work were calculated as a percentage of
their respective value to total eccentric work (hip+knee+ankle). Sex dif-

when compared to the ankle. These findings may be due to the fact that
in a single leg landing the body adopts a tactic to attenuate the impact
distally, thereby decreasing the mechanical energy demands on the more
proximal joints. The hip and knee joint extensor musculature may do
less eccentric work because of their need to quickly stiffen to contribute
to postural control of the more proximal segments (ie, head, arms, and
trunk), whereas the distal musculature (ie, gastrocnemius and soleus),
serves to attenuate the vertical ground reaction impulses.

CONCLuSIONS: Although sex differences in landing energetics exist, the in-
fluence of these differences on the disparate rate of ACL injury in males
and females requires further study. Future studies aimed at studying the
relationships between the biomechanics measured during functional
tasks and the in vivo ACL biomechanics (ie, strain) could provide the re-
search community with better information with which to interpret sex
differences in biomechanics.

EFFECT OF CONDITION, EXECuTING A CuTTING MANEuVER OR
REMAINING STATIONARY AFTER LANDING, AND GENDER ON LANDING
KINEMATICS

Shapiro R, Buhr J, Hanaki S

Department of Kinesiology and Health Promotion, University of Ken-
tucky, Lexington, KY

INTRODuCTION: Many researchers have investigated the significantly high-

er incidence rate of noncontact ACL injuries in female athletes than
males.1,2,3 Cutting and landing from a jump are most often identified as
the activities at the time of injury. Consequently, investigators have tried
to recreate these activities in an effort to define the injury mechanism
and deduce factors that cause the injury rate difference between males
and females. It has become apparent that a simple drop landing activity
does not adequately reproduce an authentic sport motion. The purpos-
es of this study was to attempt to recreate a landing condition that more
closely resembled that seen in sport competition and evaluate landing ki-
nematics. In this study landing and cutting were combined into a single
event, more closely simulating motions seen in basketball, volleyball, and
soccer and then compared with a typical drop landing.

METhODS: Healthy, male (n, 22; age, 23  1.4 years; weight, 745  100 N;
height, 1.76  0.05 m) and female (n, 23; age, 22.4  1.5 years; weight,
600  69.8 N; height, 1.65  0.06 m) subjects participated in this study.
Six Falcon high-speed cameras (120 Hz) imaged subjects marked with

reflective markers. Motion Analysis Corp. EVa software was utilized to
obtain marker object-space coordinates. Subjects were instructed to land
from a 60 cm platform and cut right, left or remain stationary after im-
pact. The direction of cut was provided immediately prior to the subject
leaving the platform. The TABLE provides a list of dependent variables.
Three-dimensional kinematic variables were calculated using Visual3-
D (C-Motion, Inc) software. t tests, P,.05, were used in this preliminary
analysis to compare the groups.

RESuLTS AND DISCuSSION: Only kinematic data from the right leg (domi-
nant leg in 44 of 45 subjects) for the land and right cut maneuver are re-

journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy | volume 37 | number 2 | 
february 2007 | a15


Right Leg Hip and Knee Angles (SD) at Impact and Maximum Range*


VARIABLE

Angle at impact (mean  SD deg)
Knee flexion

Knee adduction

Knee internal rotation
Hip flexion

Hip adduction

Hip internal rotation

MALES

CuT       NO CuT

24.7 (9.8)*     22.1 (7.3)*

3.6 (6.0)*     1.5 (4.8)*,b

–7.4 (10.2)*     0.1 (5.9)*

20.6 (15.8)*     23.4 (14.9)*

–15.0 (8.6)*,a     –10.5 (7.2)*,b

–17.3 (8.7)     –15.7 (7.7)

FEMALES

CuT       NO CuT

23.8 (7.4)ª      21.5 (6.6)ª

0.3 (6.4)ª     –2.7 (4.8)ª,b

–9.6 (10.6)ª     –2.8 (6.1)ª

22.4 (13.8)     20.3 (11.9)

–7.8 (6.8)ª     –5.9 (6.0)b

–14.8 (9.9)     –12.8 (7.8)

P<.05

*,a

*,a,b

*,a

*

*,a,b

Maximum or minimum angle after impact (mean  SD deg)

Knee flexion             97.0 (7.7)*,b        83.4 (8.6)*      83.6 (11.2)a,b   
     79.3 (6.5)a      *,a,b

Knee adduction           –7.4 (8.6)a        –8.3 (6.9)b        –12.8 (8.3)*,a   
    –14.3 (9.1)*,b     *,a,b

Knee internal rotation          4.3 (6.2)*       9.4 (5.1)*       3.3 (5.9)a    
     6.6 (5.6)a      *,a

Hip flexion             63.8 (16.9)*      55.0 (20.8)*      58.3 (16.8)a        
52.3 (17.4)a      *,a

Hip adduction            –3.8 (8.1)       –4.7 (6.6)       –0.9 (5.9)       
–1.5 (7.1)

Hip internal rotation          –4.5 (7.9)       –5.2 (8.3)       –5.5 (9.7)     
  –4.1 (8.3)

* Knee Flexion +, Knee Adduction +, Knee Internal Rotation +, Hip Flexion +, 
Hip Adduction +, Hip Internal Rotation +


ported here (TABLE). Both males and females landed in greater knee flex-
ion in the cut condition. Males had greater maximum knee flexion and
range of motion than the females in the cut condition. Females demon-
strated greater maximum knee abduction than males in both conditions.
Both groups were more externally rotated at the knee at impact in the cut
condition. Males and females reached greater hip flexion in the cut con-
dition compared to the no-cut conditions. Males were more abducted at
the hip at landing in both conditions. No differences were observed for
hip internal/external rotation.

CONCLuSIONS: Differences were observed in all 3 planes of motion when a
cut was introduced after the landing. Differences were also observed be-
tween males and females in their responses to the no cut and cut condi-
tions. The inclusion of more game-like situations in studies needs to be
considered. Further investigation as the “impact” of these differences on
potential injury including joint kinetic and neuromuscular factors needs
to be evaluated.

REFERENCES:

1. Ford KR, Myer GD, Hewett TE. Valgus knee motion during landing in high 
school fe-
male and male basketball players. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2003;35:1745-1750.

2. Pollard CD, Davis IM, Hamill J. Influence of gender on hip and knee mechan-
ics during a randomly cued cutting maneuver. Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon).
2004;19:1022-1031.

3. Fagenbaum R, Darling WG. Jump landing strategies in male and female college
athletes and the implications of such strategies for anterior cruciate ligament 
inju-
ry. Am J Sports Med. 2003;31:233-240.

GENDER DIFFERENCES IN LANDING uSING FuNCTIONAL VERSuS
NONFuNCTIONAL TASKS

Swartz EE, Metivier SJ, Decoster LC

Musculoskeletal Institute, University of New Hampshire, Durham, New
Hampshire, NH

INTRODuCTION: Previous research involving gender comparison of knee

biomechanics during landing has used both functional (ie, vertical jump)
and non functional (ie, drop landing) tasks, with conflicting results. The

purpose of this study was to identify whether gender comparisons in low-
er extremity landing biomechanics would differ between 2 landing tasks.
METhODS: Subjects performed counterbalanced trials of a vertical drop
landing (DL) (61 cm platform) and a vertical jump (VJ) landing (sus-
pended target set at 80% of their maximum VJ). Subjects were instruct-
ed to land with their dominant foot on a force plate (AMTI Watertown,
MA) imbedded into the biomechanics laboratory floor. Kinematic data
from 14 retroreflective markers placed on the dominant leg were col-
lected using a 6 camera, 3-dimensional motion capture system (Motion
Analysis, Inc, Santa Rosa, CA). Initial contact was determined from the
vertical ground reaction force data. Trial data collection for video and
ground reaction forces was set at 3 seconds and was initiated and simul-
taneously controlled through an external trigger. Data were processed
and stored (Eva software version 6.01; Motion Analysis, Inc) and ana-
lyzed using the Kintrak software package (version 6.2 Motion Analy-
sis, Inc). A 2 × 2 gender (male, female) by landing task (DL, VJ) repeat-
ed-measures design was used for the study. Twenty-eight recreationally
active subjects (14 male, age 23.2  2.9 years, height 176.3  5.3 cm,

weight 80.7 9.5 kg, VJ 60.4 8.5 cm; 14 female, age 21.5  2.4 years,

height 165.8  7.1 cm, weight 65.8  11.7 kg, VJ 40.0 6.7 cm) with no
history of significant knee injury. Average maximum knee flexion (MKF)
angles from 4 to 6 successful trials for each subject in each task were an-
alyzed using a 2 × 2 univariate ANOVA with follow-up t tests (P = .05).
RESuLTS: A significant overall effect (P = .004) for landing task was de-
tected where MKF angles were greater in the DL (M = 86.7°  14.8°, F

= 99.9°  16.8°) compared to the self initiated VJ (M = 82.8°  15.2°,

F = 79.7°  12.7°). Follow up tests revealed that the women’s MKF an-
gle increased significantly (P = .001) in the DL task. An interaction was
also detected (P = .047), where MKF angles were similar in the VJ be-
tween groups, but women had a higher MKF angle compared to men
in the DL.

DISCuSSION: A DL approach to biomechanical analysis has been used of-
ten in previous research because it helps control for differences obtained
in varying descent velocities. However, a task based on an individual per-
formance attribute, such as a percentage of a maximal VJ, has also been

a16 | february 2007 | volume 37 | number 2 | journal of orthopaedic & sports 
physical therapy



used due to its obvious functional similarities. In this study, the same
analysis variable (MKF) revealed conflicting results in the same 2 groups
of subjects that performed a landing task under 2 different conditions.
This highlights a concern regarding the tasks subjects perform during
biomechanical analyses and may also help explain why results from re-
search utilizing various tasks yield conflicting results.

CONCLuSIONS: When landing from a VJ, subjects MKF angles were simi-
lar. However, women responded differently to the DL compared to men.
Investigators should consider the appropriateness of the landing task
when deciding on research methodology.

ThE INFLuENCE OF A FOOT ORThOTIC ON LOWER EXTREMITY
TRANSVERSE PLANE KINEMATICS IN COLLEGIATE FEMALE AThLETES
WITh LARGE NAVICuLAR DROP SCORES DuRING LANDING

Carcia CR, Drouin JM, Houglum PA

Duquesne University; Slippery Rock University, Slippery Rock, PA
INTRODuCTION: Large navicular drop (LND) scores have been associat-
ed   with both increased foot pronation and medial tibial rotation. As
increased medial tibial rotation heightens anterior cruciate ligament
(ACL) strain, investigators have suggested female athletes with a LND
may be at greater risk for noncontact ACL injury. While a rear-foot me-
dially posted foot orthotic has been shown to decrease medial tibial ro-
tation during walking, its effect during landing in female athletes with
LND scores is unknown. Therefore, the purpose of our study was to com-
pare absolute tibial and relative tibiofemoral rotations in female ath-
letes with LND scores with and without a foot orthotic during 2 land-
ing tasks.

METhODS: Using a repeated measures (RM) counterbalanced design, 20
Division I and II female athletes (age, 20.1  1.0 years; height, 169.3 

9.9 cm; mass, 69.7  9.7 kg) with LND scores (mean, 9.6  2.5 mm)

completed 3 trials of a hopping and landing task with and without a
prefabricated foot orthotic. The prefabricated foot orthotic (Interpod,
St Kilda, Australia) was rigid and included a 6° extrinsic rear-foot var-
us post. Participants performed a single-leg hop at a distance equal to
45% of their height onto the center of a force plate. They also performed
a single-leg landing from a box (height, 25 cm) onto the center of the
force plate. An electromagnetic tracking system measured 3-dimensional
lower extremity kinematics while the force plate identified ground con-
tact. Absolute tibial and relative tibiofemoral rotations were calculated
for each trial. A mean of the 3 trials for both activities and conditions was
used for data analysis. Hop and landing data were analyzed with separate
RM ANOVA with 1 within factor at 2 levels (foot orthotic; no foot orthot-
ic). P values were set a priori at ,.05.

RESuLTS: There were no differences in absolute tibial (P = .549) or rela-

tive tibiofemoral rotations (P = .893) with or without the foot orthotic
during the landing task. Similarly, no differences in absolute tibial (P =

.161) or relative tibiofemoral rotations (P = .935) were identified during
the hopping task.

DISCuSSION: Results suggest prefabricated orthotics with a 6° rear-foot
varus post do not alter absolute or relative tibiofemoral rotation in fe-
male athletes with large navicular drop scores during select single-leg
landing tasks. Several explanations likely account for these findings. It is
possible, the 6° post was simply too small to alter transverse plane tibi-
al kinematics. Additionally, midfoot or forefoot landings would have in-
fluenced the potential effects of this type of orthotic. Furthermore, na-
vicular drop is a static measure of foot pronation and may not relate to
active pronation during dynamic activity.

CONCLuSION: The present study does not support the hypothesis that foot
orthoses alter transverse plane kinematics during landing in female ath-
letes with LND scores. However, additional study investigating other
types of foot orthoses (ie, inverted, forefoot post) on lower extremity ki-
nematics as well as kinetics (ie, tibiofemoral moments) is warranted be-
fore firm conclusions can be drawn regarding the influence of this type
of intervention in this population.

EFFECTS OF INCREASED BODY MASS INDEX ON LOWER EXTREMITY
MOTION PATTERNS IN A STOP-JuMP TASK

Brown CN, Yu B, Kirkendall DT, Garrett WE

Center for Human Movement Science, The University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, NC

INTRODuCTION: Anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) injuries are common in

sports. Altered neuromuscular control has been identified as a possible
risk factor for ACL injury and may be a consequence of increased body
mass index (BMI) and decreased relative strength. The purpose of this
study was to test the effects of increased BMI on lower extremity kine-
matics and kinetics of male and female recreational athletes performing
a stop-jump task.

METhODS: A cross-sectional design was used to test the effects of BMI
on landing patterns. All data were collected in a biomechanics labora-
tory. A weight vest with 10% of the subject’s body weight evenly distrib-
uted around the chest was used to increase BMI and decrease relative
strength. Subjects performed 3 practice and 7 test trials of the stop-jump
task for each of the weighted and nonweighted conditions. The testing
order of conditions was randomized. Twenty college aged recreational
athletes were recruited (10 females, 10 males). Average height, mass, and
age was 1.68  0.06 m, 63.2  7.5 kg, and 22.6  3.8 years for females,

and 1.78  0.06 m, 77.5  9.7 kg, and 22.8  2.4 years for males. A real

time 3-dimensional (3-D) videographic data acquisition system was used
to collect 3-D coordinate data at a sampling rate of 120 frames/second.
Two force plates were used to collect ground reaction force and moment
data at 1200 samples/second. Selected lower extremity motion pattern
measures were reduced from the 3-D videographic and force plate data
including joint angles, moments, and angular velocities for knee and hip
flexion-extension, valgus-varus (abduction-adduction), and internal-ex-
ternal rotation. These variables were identified at initial ground contact
and at their maximum point during the stance phase. Data from the first
3 analyzable trials of each subject were used. Mixed factorial ANOVAs
were performed to compare selected knee and hip kinematics and kinet-
ics between weighted and nonweighted conditions with consideration of
possible gender effects (a = .05).

RESuLTS: With increased BMI, subjects exhibited significantly decreased
hip flexion angle (P = .01) and knee flexion angular velocity (P = .01) at
initial ground contact, and increased peak knee extension moment dur-
ing landing (P = .02). The effects of BMI on other knee and hip motion
pattern measures were not consistent across subjects.

DISCuSSION: Decreasing relative strength by increasing BMI resulted in a
more extended lower extremity position with decreased knee flexion ve-
locity at landing for college aged recreational athletes. Previous studies
have linked extended lower extremity position at landing with ACL inju-
ry, therefore increased BMI and decreased relative strength may increase
the risk of ACL injuries.

CONCLuSIONS: Decreased relative strength resulted in deleterious chang-
es in landing patterns. Strength training may need to be included in fu-
ture ACL injury prevention programs. This abstract was presented at the
National Athletic Trainers’ Association Annual Meeting as a Free Com-
munication in Indianapolis, IN, June 2005. Reproduced with permission
from the Journal of Athletic Training. 40(2 Suppl):S32, 2005. ©2005
National Athletic Trainers’ Association, Inc.

LOWER EXTREMITY MOTION PATTERNS IN YOuTh SPORTS CAMP
PARTICIPANTS PERFORMING 5 TYPES OF SPORT-SPECIFIC STOP-JuMP
LANDING TASKS

Oñate JA, Belez AL, Van Lunen BL, Cortes N

Old Dominion University, Norfolk, VA

INTRODuCTION: Youth female athletes have a greater risk for incurring an-
terior cruciate ligament (ACL) injuries as compared to their male coun-
terparts. The purpose of this study was to analyze the differences in knee
kinematics between gender and movement task during the stop-jump
phase of 5 types of jump-landing tasks.

journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy | volume 37 | number 2 | 
february 2007 | a17



METhODS: Experimental design study conducted during a youth sports
camp in a university biomechanics research lab. Participants performed
5 standardized stop-jump landing task approaches: (1) 3-step, (2) 5-m
run, (3) volleyball block, (4) 33-cm box-drop, and (5) 5-m deceleration
soccer pass and retreat, in a counterbalanced order. Eighteen healthy
males (n = 10, height = 149.0  9.6 cm, weight = 47.6  12.5 kg) and fe-
males (n = 8, height = 152.2  9.3 cm, weight = 52.4  15.6 kg) between
the ages of 10 to 12 years old participated in this study. All subjects were
participants in a youth sports program and played a minimum of 1 sea-
son  of organized basketball, volleyball, or soccer. Two force-plates and
a 3-D electromagnetic tracking system collected kinematics and kinet-
ics data during the tasks. The stop-jump phase, defined as initial ground
contact to maximum knee flexion, was analyzed for each task. The de-
pendent variables measured were knee flexion angle at initial contact
and maximum range of motion, knee valgus (+)/varus (–) angle at ini-
tial contact and at maximum knee flexion angle of the preferred stance
leg during the stop-jump phase of each task. Four separate 2 (gender) ×
5 (task) repeated-measures analysis of variance (P<.05) were conducted,
with Tukey post hoc testing used for comparisons.

RESuLTS: Significant differences were found between tasks for knee flex-
ion angle at initial contact and knee flexion range of motion (P = .001,
respectively), with no gender differences noted. Individuals performing
the stop-jump phase of a 5-m deceleration soccer pass and retreat landed
with the knee more extended and had less knee flexion range of motion
as compared to their knee position in the other landing tasks. Females
performed each task in a greater knee valgus position at initial ground
contact (P = .038) as compared to their male counterparts who landed in
a varus position. Males landed in a greater knee varus position at maxi-
mum knee flexion during the deceleration soccer pass (P = .002) as com-
pared to knee position in the other tasks.

DISCuSSION: The most important finding of this study was that female
youth sports camp participants tended to land in a greater valgus posi-
tion at initial ground contact as compare to their male counterparts. Ad-
ditionally, this trend occurred across 5 different types of jump-landing
tasks resulting in consistency of landing techniques regardless of the type
of jump-landing task performed.

CONCLuSIONS: This information may have implications in the design of ex-
perimental testing strategies to evaluate lower extremity motion patterns
and instructional strategies aimed at reducing ACL injuries in youth ath-
letes. Presented recently at the National Athletic Trainers’ Association
Annual Meeting and Symposia, 2005. Reproduced with permission from
the Journal of Athletic Training. 40(2 Suppl):S20, 2005. ©2005 Nation-
al Athletic Trainers’ Association, Inc.

DETERMINING ThE ACCuRACY AND RELIABILITY OF A DIGITAL
PhOTOGRAPhIC-GONIOMETRIC METhOD FOR LOWER EXTREMITY
MEASuRES

Moncrieff MJ, Jenkins JL, Livingston LA

Dalhousie University; University of North Carolina-Greensboro, Greens-
boro, NC

INTRODuCTION: Alignment of the lower limb has been studied extensively

as a potential risk factor for ACL injury.1,3,4 Comparison between inves-
tigations is difficult, however, as there is little to no agreement in the lit-
erature about the characterization of abnormal alignment or the meth-
ods of measuring it.2 Therefore, the purpose of this study was to estimate
the accuracy and reliability characteristics of a 2-dimensional (2-D) dig-
ital photographic-goniometric measurement instrument, in conjunction
with standardized measurement protocols, for deriving static noninva-
sive measures of lower limb alignment and segment length.

METhODS: Instrumentation accuracy and reliability characteristics were
estimated for goniometric measurements (n = 35) extracted from digital
photographs of markers positioned on a rigid, life-sized planar measure-
ment jig to anatomically simulate the quadriceps (Q) angle, tibiofemoral
(TF) angle, and the distal and proximal ends of the femur. Measurements

were taken from identical sets of photographs, by 2 testers, during 2 in-
dependent measurement sessions. Intratester and intertester reliability
characteristics were then established for the same measurements taken
from digital photographs of anatomical markers positioned, using stan-
dardized protocols, on human participants (n = 20) by the same 2 tes-
ters. Photographs were captured of each individual while adopting 2 dif-
ferent stance positions (ie, self selected, Romberg) during 2 independent
testing sessions with each tester. The testers then derived measurements
from each other’s photographs to distinguish between the error generat-
ed by anatomical marker placement versus tester error associated with
manipulation of the goniometer on the photograph.

RESuLTS: The digital photographic-goniometric instrumentation method
yielded measurements with extremely high degrees of instrumentation
accuracy (ICC2,1 = 0.97-0.99), intertester reliability (ICC2,1 = 0.98-0.99),

and intratester reliability (ICC2,1 = 0.98-0.99) characteristics from the

2-D measurement jig. For measurements derived from photographs of
markers placed on human participants, the reliability characteristics (ie,
intratester ICC2,1 = 0.458-0.958; intertester ICC2,1 = 0.257-0.944) ranged

from fair to almost perfect, with values for measures of femur length con-

sistently stronger than that of the TF and Q angle, respectively. In gener-
al, the reliability of measures derived in the Romberg stance was higher
than those taken in a self-selected stance. Between-tester measurement
differences appeared to be due to differences in anatomical marker place-
ment rather than goniometer manipulation techniques.

DISCuSSION: The digital photographic-goniometric method of measure-
ment yielded almost perfect accuracy and reliability characteristics for
measures derived from the planar measurement jig, and generated fair
to almost perfect reliability characteristics for measures derived from hu-
man participants. Higher reliability coefficients were generally associat-
ed with measurements derived while participants adopted a standard-
ized stance position, and for those measures requiring the use of fewer
anatomical markers.

CONCLuSIONS: The digital photographic-goniometric method of measure-
ment, used in conjunction with standardized measurement protocols,
may yield accurate and reliable 2-D measures of the Q angle, TF angle,
and femur length. The key is to reduce between tester differences in ana-
tomical marker application.

REFERENCES:

1. McLean SG, Walker K, Ford KR, Myer GD, Hewett TE, van den Bogert AJ. 
Evaluation
of a two dimensional analysis method as a screening and evaluation tool for 
ante-
rior cruciate ligament injury. Br J Sports Med. 2005;39:355-362.

2. Murphy DF, Connolly DA, Beynnon BD. Risk factors for lower extremity injury: 
a re-
view of the literature. Br J Sports Med. 2003;37:13-29.

3. Nyland J, Smith S, Beickman K, Armsey T, Caborn DN. Frontal plane knee angle 
af-
fects dynamic postural control strategy during unilateral stance. Med Sci Sports
Exerc. 2002;34:1150-1157.

4. Soderman K, Alfredson H, Pietila T, Werner S. Risk factors for leg injuries 
in female
soccer players: a prospective investigation during one out-door season. Knee 
Surg
Sports Traumatol Arthrosc. 2001;9:313-321.

RELIABILITY AND VALIDITY OF A 2-D APPROACh TO ASSESSING FRONTAL
PLANE DYNAMIC ALIGNMENT OF ThE LOWER EXTREMITY

Earl JE, Monteiro SK, Geiser CF, Alexander PT

University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, WI

INTRODuCTION: The Sport Motion Analysis Review Tool (SMART) is a
fast, inexpensive, and not technically demanding software package that
is used for basic movement analysis. This could be used in a large pro-
spective study screening the frontal plane lower extremity dynamic align-
ment of athletes to examine whether or not poor dynamic alignment is
a risk factor for ACL injury. The purpose of this study was to determine
the reliability of the SMART program in assessing frontal plane kinemat-
ics, and to determine its validity by comparing it to the gold standard 3-
D motion analysis system.

a18 | february 2007 | volume 37 | number 2 | journal of orthopaedic & sports 
physical therapy



Reliability and Validity

JuMP LANDING    VALGuS DISTANCE   VALGuS ANGLE

ICC1,k between days      .74        .88

ICC2,k between testers      .80        .90

SEM            .02 m       3.6°

Pearson r         –.88        .53

STEPDOWN      VALGuS ANGLE   PELVIS ANGLE

ICC1,k between days      .95        .85

ICC2,k between testers     .84        .91

SEM            1.6°        2.1°

Pearson r          .87        –.01

METhODS: The right leg of 10 female subjects, with no history of signifi-
cant lower extremity injury was tested. A video camera was positioned
directly in front of the subject and recorded a digital video file for use
with the SMART program. 3-D kinematic data were collected concur-
rently via a 7-camera high-speed motion analysis system. Data were col-
lected during a jump-landing task (drop off the front of a block, land
with both feet, and immediately perform a maximal vertical jump), and
a stepdown task (stand on your right leg on top of a block, slowly lower
your left foot to tap the floor). Each subject performed 3 repetitions of
each task. Subjects were tested a second time 1 week later. For the jump
landing, the variables were knee valgus angle, and valgus distance (lin-
ear distance between the markers on the lateral femoral condyles). ROM
values were determined from foot contact to maximum knee valgus. For
the step-down the variables were knee valgus angle, and hip adduction
angle. ROM values were determined from quiet standing to toe touch.
These variables were obtained from both the SMART program, and via
analysis of the 3-D data. The trials were analyzed separately by 3 re-
searchers. Between day (intratester), and between tester reliability were
calculated using the intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) statistic. The
precision of the measurements was analyzed using the standard error of
the measurement (SEM). Concurrent validity was calculated using Pear-
son’s product moment correlation.

RESuLTS: The between day reliability was high for all variables (TABLE).

The SEM values are small, indicating an acceptable amount of measure-
ment error. Pearson’s correlation revealed excellent validity for the val-
gus angle measure during the step-down and for the valgus distance dur-
ing the jump.

DISCuSSION: This technique using the SMART program has been found to
be reliable in assessing frontal plane lower extremity alignment both be-
tween days and between testers. Though this 2-D approach is attractive
for use in a multisite study because it is inexpensive, portable, and does
not require advanced technical skills to operate, it had not been previ-
ously validated to the gold standard 3-D motion analysis. The variables
from the SMART program that are the most valid are the valgus angle
excursion during the step-down, and valgus distance excursion during
the vertical jump. These variables should be considered for use in future

prospective screening studies.

uTILITY OF ThE FRONTAL PLANE PROJECTION ANGLE OF ThE KNEE
DuRING SINGLE LEG SQuATS

Willson JD, Davis I

Department of Physical Therapy, University of Delaware, Newark, DE;
Drayer Physical Therapy Institute, Hummelstown, PA

INTRODuCTION: Abnormal lower extremity mechanics during athletic ac-

tivities are believed to contribute to the etiology of numerous knee joint
injuries. The single leg squat test is commonly used by practicing cli-
nicians to identify individuals who display such abnormal mechanics.
Presently, due to the restraints of typical clinical settings, analysis of this
test is done qualitatively. However, quantification of a patient’s perfor-
mance on this test would facilitate documentation of these mechanics as
well as changes due to interventions. Two-dimensional images record-
ed by a digital camera reveal the frontal plane projection angle (FPPA)
of the knee during this test. However, it is unclear to what extent the
FPPA determined using such methods is related to actual 3-dimension-
al (3-D) kinematics. Specifically, it would be beneficial to know the ex-
tent to which the FPPA during this test represents hip and knee rota-
tion in the transverse and frontal planes as such rotations are frequently
associated with injuries to the ACL and patellofemoral joint. Addition-
ally, the extent to which performance on the SL squat test is associated
with these rotations during faster, more demanding tasks has not been
determined. The purpose of this study was to examine the correlation
between the FPPA of the knee during SL squats and hip and knee fron-
tal and transverse plane kinematics. Second, we analyzed to what ex-
tent the FPPA of the knee during SL squats reflects knee and hip kine-
matics during a SL landing. We hypothesized that the FPPA during SL
squats would be significantly correlated with greater hip adduction, hip
internal rotation, knee abduction, and knee external rotation during SL
squats and landings.

METhODS: 20 healthy subjects (11 female, 9 male; mean age, 26.4 years)

performed 5 SL squats to a self-selected depth and 5 SL landings from
a height of 23 cm. All trials were collected for the dominant leg of each
subject. Retroreflective markers placed on the lower extremity were
tracked by a 6 camera Vicon motion analysis system collecting at 120
Hz. V3-D software was used to determine lower extremity kinematics.
Additionally, during each squat trial, a digital image was recorded by
a  camera placed 2 m anterior to the subject, perpendicular to the fron-
tal plane, and at the height of the knee joint in SL stance. Each image
was recorded as the subject passed 45° knee flexion as determined by an
electrogoniometer. Markers placed on the leg of each subject bisecting
the frontal plane of the proximal thigh, femoral condyles, and malleoli
at the ankle were used to determine the FPPA of the knee in each digi-
tal image (CorelDraw). To synchronize the digital camera with the mo-
tion analysis, a signal was delivered to the motion analysis workstation
as the image was recorded. Pearson correlation coefficients were calcu-
lated between the FPPA and selected 3-D kinematics during SL stance
and landing conditions.

RESuLTS: The change in FPPA from SL stance to SL squat was associated
with greater hip adduction, knee abduction, and knee external rotation
during SL squats and SL landings (TABLE 1). Three-dimensional rotations

Pearson Correlation Coefficients for the


CONCLuSION: This 2-D approach using the SMART program is an accept-
able alternative to 3-D kinematic analysis in assessing frontal plane dy-
namic alignment. This tool could be used in a large scale, multisite, pro-
spective study examining lower extremity dynamic alignment as a risk
factor for ACL injury. This study was presented at the 2005 GLATA An-
nual Meeting, Toledo, OH.

TABLE 1

Hip adduction

Association Between the FPPA Excursion
During SL Squats and 3-D Rotation
Excursions During SL Squats and Landings

SL SQuAT    SL LANDING

0.58, P = .008    0.67, P = .001

Hip internal rotation    0.35, P = .16    0.16, P = .51

Knee abduction     0.71, P = .001    0.58, P = .008
Knee external rotation   0.77, P<.001    0.54, P = .015

journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy | volume 37 | number 2 | 
february 2007 | a19



TABLE 2

Pearson Correlation Coefficients
(all P<.001) for the Association
Between 3-D Rotations During

SL Squats and SL Landings

0.19 N·m/kg) compared to their male counterparts (1.28  0.27 Nm/kg,
P,.001); however, there were no gender differences in %E. Women also
demonstrated significantly larger knee valgus PJD (7.3°  6.6°) com-
pared to men (3.3°  3.5°, P = .04). Significant time main effects dem-
onstrated increased hip flexion, hip adduction, and knee external rota-
tion PJD following the bout of exercise.


Hip adduction                 0.72

Hip internal rotation              0.76

Knee abduction                0.79

Knee external rotation             0.80

recorded during SL squats were indicative of the rotations recorded dur-
ing SL landings (TABLE 2).

DISCuSSION: The results of this study support previous reports suggesting
an association between 2-D and 3-D methods to quantify lower extremi-
ty kinematics during weight bearing activities. These results also suggest
that the FPPA during SL squats may be used to gauge knee kinematics
during faster, more dynamic activities. Finally, 3-D kinematics within
each subject appear to be similar between SL squats and SL landings.
CONCLuSIONS: Two-dimensional analysis of knee alignment during SL
squats  is a simple alternative to 3-D kinematic analysis. As such, it may
be an effective screen for identification of individuals prone to knee inju-
ries due to excessive frontal or transverse plane kinematics during weight
bearing activities.

hIP ABDuCTOR FuNCTION INFLuENCES KINEMATICS OF LANDING

Jacobs C, Mattacola CG, Uhl TL, Shapiro R, Rayens WS
Lexington Clinic, Lexington, KY; University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY
INTRODuCTION: Rapid deceleration during sporting activities, such as
landing from a jump, has been identified as a common mechanism of
anterior cruciate ligament injury. While weakness of the hip abductors
has been previously associated with chronic knee injuries, there is lim-
ited research investigating the role of potential gender differences in hip
abductor function with lower extremity kinematics. Therefore, the pur-
pose of this study was to compare hip abductor strength and endurance,
as well as landing kinematics between men and women.

METhODS: A repeated measures design was employed for this laboratory-
based protocol. Thirty healthy adults participated in the study (15 wom-
en; age, 23.2  2.9 years; height, 165.9  6.7 cm; mass, 66.5  7.3 kg; 15

men; age, 24.4  3.0 years, height, 180.3  10.4 cm; mass, 78.8  14.1

kg). Peak joint displacement (PJD) values were determined for the hip
and knee of the preferred landing leg during a hopping task. When per-
forming the hopping task, subjects hopped off 2 feet and landed on a sin-
gle leg in a target area located on the floor. Upon landing, subjects were
instructed to stabilize quickly and remain as motionless as possible for 5
seconds. The length and height of the jump were equivalent to 40% and
15% of each subject’s height, respectively. Subjects completed 3 pre-ex-
ercise trials and the mean peak joint displacements during landing were
used for analysis. Following the pre-exercise trials, subjects performed
3, 5-second maximal voluntary isometric contractions of the hip abduc-
tors. Peak torque (PT) values were normalized to body mass (Nm/kg).
Subjects then performed an endurance test, and angular impulse values
(force × time) were calculated. After a 15-minute recovery interval, sub-
jects completed a submaximal, 30-second bout of exercise during which
we calculated the percent of maximal endurance utilized (%E). Imme-
diately following the 30-second bout of exercise, subjects completed 3
postexercise landing trials. Independent t tests were used to assess gen-
der differences in PT and %E. Separate 2 × 2 ANOVAs (gender × test)
were used to evaluate potential gender differences in hip and knee joint
PJD in all 3 planes of motion prior to and following the 30-second bout
of isometric hip abduction. An a level of .05 was considered significant
for analyses.

RESuLTS: Women demonstrated significantly lower PT values (0.94 

DISCuSSION: Our results suggest that the hip abductors play an important
role in neuromuscular control of the knee when landing from a jump.
Women demonstrated lower peak torque of the hip abductors than men
and also demonstrated increased knee valgus displacement. Regardless
of gender, neuromuscular control of the lower extremity was altered fol-
lowing a submaximal bout of isometric hip abduction.

CONCLuSIONS: Inadequate hip abductor strength influences knee position
during landing and may be a contributing factor in the mechanisms of
noncontact knee injury. Future investigations are needed to evaluate the
efficacy of lower extremity strengthening and/or rehabilitation programs
that include exercises targeting this muscle group.

ECCENTRIC ThIGh STRENGTh AND ANKLE EVERSION MOTION PREDICT
TIBIAL INTERNAL ROTATION AT ThE KNEE

Shimokochi Y, Lee SY, Schmitz RJ, Shultz SJ

University of North Carolina at Greensboro, Greensboro, NC
INTRODuCTION: Excessive internal rotation of the tibia relative to the fe-
mur  (knee internal rotation) has been shown to increase anterior cru-
ciate ligament loading. However, much is still unknown about the col-
lective factors that control this motion during weight bearing activity.
Hence, we examined the relationship between ankle eversion motion and
isokinetic thigh strength with knee internal rotation motion during a sin-
gle  leg landing.

METhODS: During session 1, 18 recreationally active females (22.4  2.8
years, 162.5  8.1 cm, 57.8  9.3 kg) performed 2 sets of 5 repetitions of
isokinetic maximal eccentric and concentric quadriceps and hamstrings

muscle contractions at 180°/s. The peak torque was obtained from each
muscle group and contraction type and normalized to the subject’s body
weight. In session 2, kinematic data were obtained from the dominant
leg during 5 single-leg landings from a 45 cm box using a 3-D electro-
magnetic tracking system. From these data, peak knee internal rotation
(KIRpk) was defined as the initial peak value after foot contact, and an-
kle eversion (EV) was defined as the frontal plane lateral rotation of the
foot relative to the shank at KIRpk. Multiple stepwise linear regressions
determined whether EV and thigh muscle strength would predict KIR-
pk. Eccentric and concentric thigh muscle strength were analyzed in sep-
arate analyses.

RESuLTS: KIRpk occurred shortly after foot contact (64  24 ms) at 35.0°

 8.5° of knee flexion. On average subjects experienced 9.4°  3.8° of
KIRpk and 7.8°  6.4° of EV. Stepwise linear regression revealed that
EV entered the model first and predicted 21.7% of variance in KIRpk

(P = .05). Once EV was accounted for, normalized eccentric knee exten-
sor torque (nEKE) had the highest partial correlation with KIRpk (rpartial

= .355) and entered the model next, but did not result in a significant R2

change (R2 change = 0.088; P = .19). However, once normalized eccen-
tric knee flexor torque (nEKF) entered on the third step (rpartial = –.615),
nEKE and nEKF together explained an additional 26.3% of the vari-

ance in KIRpk (the partial correlation with nEKE increased to .638, once
nEKF was accounted for). This relationship is such that subjects who
had greater eversion motion, increased eccentric knee extensor strength,
and decreased eccentric knee flexor strength experienced greater KIRpk
shortly after ground contact. Concentric muscle strength was not a sig-
nificant predictor of KIRpk.

DISCuSSION: Ankle eversion has been shown to increase tibial internal ro-
tation relative to the foot, and is thought to increase tibial internal ro-
tation relative to the femur. However, previous studies have not dem-
onstrated this relationship at the knee during running or walking. In
contrast, we used a single-leg landing from a relatively high height (45

a20 | february 2007 | volume 37 | number 2 | journal of orthopaedic & sports 
physical therapy



cm). Given the substantially higher peak ground reaction force and force
attenuation demands associated with this task, it is likely that greater
levels of EV, thus greater KIRpk were realized. A secondary finding is
that the relationship between thigh strength and KIRpk was stronger
with maximal eccentric versus concentric contractions. This may in part
be due to the fact that maximal eccentric isokinetic muscle strength has
been shown to be less affected by angular velocity than maximal con-
centric isokinetic muscle strength. Although adding only nEKE did not
alter the r2 significantly, an additional 26.3% of the variance in KIRpk
was explained once both nEKE and nEKF were accounted for. Hence,
the absolute strength balance between nEKE and nEKF may be a criti-
cal factor in controlling KIRpk.

CONCLuSIONS: The ACL has been shown to be loaded with the applica-
tion of internal rotation torque to the knee joint, especially during shal-
low knee flexion angles (ie, below ~45°) and a forceful quadriceps muscle
contraction. Our findings suggest that preventing excessive ankle ever-
sion  may reduce the amount of knee internal rotation that occurs with
force attenuation upon landing, and lend further support to the impor-
tance of balanced strength of quadriceps and hamstring muscles in knee
stability.

BIOMEChANICS OF ANTICIPATED AND uNANTICIPATED SIDE-STEP
CuTTING IN MALE AND FEMALE BASKETBALL PLAYERS DuRING GAME-
LIKE SCENARIOS AND LOWER EXTREMITY STRENGTh

Carlstedt KE, Brandner RD, Kernozek TW

Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago, Northshore Outpatient Clinic,
Chicago, IL; University of Wisconsin-La Crosse, Department of Health
Professions, La Crosse, WI; Luther Hospital, Eau Claire, WI
INTRODuCTION:    The anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) is one of the most
commonly injured ligaments in the knee. The majority of these injuries
occur due to noncontact mechanisms such as, sudden acceleration/decel-
eration, change of direction, or landing from a jump. Most of the current
studies examining sidestep cutting has been performed on male athletes
with none evaluating the athletes’ strength concurrently. The aim of this
study was to determine the effects of unanticipated game like scenarios
on the lower extremity joint kinematics and kinetics during the stance
phase of side-step cutting maneuvers as well as to determine any gender
differences in strength.

METhODS: Nineteen females and 19 males NCAA division III basketball
players were tested. All athletes had no prior history of serious knee in-
jury. Subjects were analyzed using a 3 dimensional motion analysis sys-
tem and 2 force platforms during 4 different game like cutting condi-
tions: anticipated cut, unanticipated pass to left side, unanticipated fake
to left side, and unanticipated straight ahead pass. An infrared timing
light system was used to determine approach speed and to cue the pass-
er to throw a ball to another player. The subjects were instructed to fol-
low the movement of the ball and to intercept the pass as they would in
a game situation. Each subject performed 5 trials of each scenario list-
ed previously in a randomized order for both dominant and nondom-
inant legs. All ground reaction force data, moment data, and strength
data were normalized (percent body weight and Nm/kg of body weight).
A series of repeated measures analysis of variance were used on each of
the kinematic and kinetic dependent variables (a = .05). Bonferroni post
hoc tests were used if tests were significant. t tests were used to compare
strength values between genders (a = .05).

RESuLTS: Overall, cutting conditions resulted in greater maximum knee
valgus angles for females compared to males during stance. In gener-
al, females exhibited significantly more knee valgus throughout stance,
significantly less hip flexion at initial contact, and significantly less hip
extension during the stance phase of all cutting conditions. Maximum
internal knee extensor moment was significantly greater in males than
females. Maximum internal hip abductor moment was significantly
greater in females, while maximum internal hip adduction moment was
significantly greater in males. Stance time was not different across con-

ditions. The knee extensor and knee flexor isokinetic strength measure-
ments were significantly less in females. In addition, weight normalized
hip abductor strength values were significantly lower in females.

DISCuSSION: There were no significant differences found between an-
ticipated and unanticipated cutting scenarios. There were several gen-
der differences observed between male and female athletes. Overall,
female players demonstrated greater knee valgus angles across condi-
tions as well as greater maximum internal hip abduction moments than
males. This increased internal hip abductor torque must be generated
by females to avoid movement into a position of increased hip adduc-
tion and further knee valgus. This has been indicated as a high-risk po-
sition for ACL injuries. Greater internal maximum hip adduction mo-
ments in male players and larger maximum hip abduction moments in
females during cutting maneuvers may correspond to underlying ana-
tomical gender differences in hip structure or differences in lumbopelvic
strength and stability. Further research is needed to examine the poten-
tial factors that place female athletes at higher risk for ACL injury dur-
ing cutting maneuvers in sport.

CONCLuSIONS: Unanticipated game-like cutting conditions produced few
changes in knee and hip kinematics and kinetics as compared to antici-
pated cutting maneuvers. Female basketball players demonstrated sig-
nificantly larger knee valgus angles and greater internal hip abductor
moments than males throughout the stance phase across all game-like
scenarios. Females with weak hip abductor strength may not be able to
generate a large enough internal hip abductor moment to avoid high-
risk knee positions for ACL injury during cutting maneuvers. Further
research is needed to examine the relationship of lumbopelvic strength
to cutting mechanics in male and female athletes during game-like
scenarios.

GENDER AND AGE COMPARISONS IN NEuROMuSCuLAR AND
BIOMEChANICAL ChARACTERISTICS OF ThE KNEE IN YOuNG AThLETES

Sell TC, Abt JP, Nagai T, Myers JB, Fu FH, Lephart SM
Neuromuscular Research Laboratory, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA
INTRODuCTION: The majority of research examining gender differenc-
es  related to noncontact ACL injuries has focused on high school and
collegiate athletes due to the disparity in injury rates between genders.
Yet, current evidence suggests that injury rate differences also occur in
younger, school-aged athletes. In addition, the potential contributors to
these injury rate differences in school-aged athletes are largely unknown.
The purpose of this study was to examine and compare the gender and
age group strength, balance, jump height, and landing kinematics char-
acteristics in high school and school-aged athletes.

METhODS: Forty healthy high school (16.8  0.8 years) and 40 school-
aged (10.8  0.8 years), athletes with an equal distribution of males and
females within each group participated in the study. Each subject under-

went an isokinetic strength test (knee flexion and extension at 60°/s),
single-leg balance assessment (eyes open and eyes closed), vertical jump
height test, and a kinematic analysis (knee flexion and valgus angle at
initial contact) during a single-leg vertical stop jump task. A 2-way ANO-
VA (age × gender) was utilized to examine age group (within gender) and
gender (within age group) differences.

RESuLTS: Significant (P,.05) gender differences were revealed in strength,

balance, and jump height performance in the high school group. Specifi-
cally, males had greater strength (flexion and extension) and higher jump
height whereas females had better balance. No differences were observed
in the school-aged group in any of the variables analyzed. Significant age
group differences were observed within both genders for strength (flex-
ion and extension) and jump height such that high school athletes had
greater strength and jump height performance. School-aged males had
better balance than high school males. No significant differences were
observed in landing kinematics for any of the comparisons made.

DISCuSSION: Previous studies have demonstrated significant kinematic
differences during sports tasks in high school and college-aged athletes.

journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy | volume 37 | number 2 | 
february 2007 | a21



The current study did not reveal kinematic differences but did reveal
strength differences which may partially explain the differences in inju-
ry rates in these athletes.

CONCLuSIONS: The lack of gender differences within school-aged athletes
does not help to explain the gender differences in knee injuries described
in the literature. Research should continue to examine the neuromuscu-
lar and biomechanical characteristics of young athletes.

DIFFERENCES IN LOWER-LIMB NEuROMuSCuLAR CONTROL BETWEEN
SPORTS MOVEMENTS EXECuTED IN LABORATORY AND GAME SETTINGS

Saunders N, Otago L, McLean S

School of Human Movement and Sport Sciences, University of Ballarat,
Ballarat, Australia; The Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH

INTRODuCTION: Anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) injury is a common and

traumatic sports injury. While the underlying mechanisms remain un-
clear, neuromuscular control elicited during high-risk sports movements
has become increasingly viewed as a primary risk factor.1 To date, neuro-
muscular predictors of ACL injury have typically arisen from lab-based
assessments of these movements, as a means to counter the inherently
random and unpredictable nature of the true game setting. It is possi-
ble however, that this approach excludes important components of actu-
al game-play that contribute directly to the chosen movement response
and resultant injury risk.3 A game-based assessment of high-risk sports
movements may thus afford more reliable neuromuscular injury predic-
tors, and hence, more effective injury screening and prevention strat-
egies. With this in mind, the purpose of the current investigation was
to compare lab and game-based measures of lower limb neuromuscular
control during high-risk sports movements.

METhODS: Ten female subjects (age 24.3  9.5 years) had lower limb

EMG data recorded continuously during a fixtured netball game. At a
subsequent session, occurring in the lab, EMG data were also recorded
for 3 chosen conditions (as below). The movement chosen for investiga-
tion was a “leap” land, which is commonly employed in netball and in-
volves taking off on a single leg and landing on the opposite leg. For each
subject, bilateral EMG (Mespec 4000, MegaWin) data, sampled at 1000
Hz, were recorded telemetrically for rectus femoris (RF), biceps femoris
(BF), medial hamstring (MH), and gluteus medius (GM) muscles. Dur-
ing lab testing, subjects performed 5 leap land trials for each leg, for 3
specific movement conditions of increasing complexity, namely: (1) run
and leap land (Land); (2) run, leap land whilst catching a ball, pivot and
pass to a teammate in the same movement (No Def); (3) break from a
defender, run, leap land while catching a ball, pivot and pass to a team-
mate in the same movement (Def). The point of initial contact (IC) of the
land leg, for both the game and lab trials was first determined via video
camera recordings. EMG data were then analyzed for each trial to deter-
mine muscle onset relative to IC (onset to IC), and the resultant muscle
burst duration that occurred concurrent with IC. Specifically, the onset
level was defined as the point where muscle activation exceeded baseline
levels by at least 1 SD for a minimum of 10 milliseconds.2 All dependent
measures were subsequently submitted to a 2-way ANOVA to determine
for the main effects of test condition and leg.

RESuLTS: Onset to IC for the RF was observed to be significantly differ-

ent between the game and lab conditions (Game versus Land P = .050,
Game versus No Def P = .016, Game versus Def P = .027). Onset of ac-
tivation occurred much closer to IC during the game (48  35 millisec-
onds) compared to the lab (Land: 87  22 milliseconds; No Def: 84 
44 milliseconds; Def: 80  31 milliseconds) conditions. Comparisons of
muscle burst duration data failed to yield significant results for all sta-
tistical comparisons. No difference was found between approach speed
for each condition.

DISCuSSION: The following implications of a delay in RF onset during a
game are proposed. The delay in RF onset during a game may impact
knee stability at landing and therefore the potential to counteract po-
tentially hazardous joint load states. Conversely, a delayed onset of RF

may demonstrate an adaptive strategy for knee stability that is necessary
for the inherently random nature of a netball game. The delay in RF on-
set may be unrelated to injury risk and indicative of RF behavior to op-
timize performance in a game setting. Finally, the delay in RF onset may
be a reflection of the demand for hip and upper body control necessary
during game play.

CONCLuSIONS: When examining high risk sporting maneuvers, there is
some evidence that what we test in the lab may reflect the game. How-
ever more research is required to ensure that any subtle differences be-
tween the game and laboratory setting are not key components to under-
standing injury mechanisms. This abstract was presented as a poster at
ISB 05 in Cleveland.

REFERENCES:

1. Griffin LY, Agel J, Albohm MJ, Arendt EA. Noncontact anterior cruciate 
ligament in-
juries: risk factors and prevention. J Am Acad Orthop Surg. 2000;8:141-150.

2. Hodges PW, Bui BH. A comparison of computer-based methods for the determina-
tion of onset of muscle contraction using electromyography. Electroencephalogr 
Clin
Neurophysiol. 1996;101:511-519.

3. McLean SG, Lipfert SW, van den Bogert AJ. Effect of gender and defen-
sive opponent on the biomechanics of sidestep cutting. Med Sci Sports Exerc.
2004;36:1008-1016.

CASE REPORT: CAN NEuROMuSCuLAR MEASuRES PREDICT ACL INJuRY?

Otago L, Saunders N, McLean S

School of Human Movement and Sport Sciences, University of Ballarat,
Australia; The Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH

INTRODuCTION: Neuromuscular control elicited during high-risk sports

movements has become increasingly viewed as a primary risk factor for
noncontact ACL injuries.1 Understanding neuromuscular characteristics
prior to an ACL injury could be invaluable in elucidating injury mecha-
nisms and contributing to the development of accurate screening meth-
ods. However, prospective neuromuscular-based studies in an attempt to
identify predictors of ACL injury would be very difficult because any time
lapse between testing and injury may deem results questionable and in-
valid, as neuromuscular measures can be influenced, for example, with
training. This case report discusses the findings from a subject who sus-
tained an ACL injury 6 days post testing (from the study described be-
low), which indicates possible neuromuscular dysfunction that may have
contributed to the ACL injury.

METhODS: Ten female subjects (age, 24.3  9.5 years) had lower limb

EMG data recorded for 3 chosen conditions (as below). The movement
chosen for investigation was a “leap” land, which is commonly employed
in netball and involves taking off on a single leg and landing on the op-
posite leg. For each subject, bilateral EMG (Mespec 4000, MegaWin)
data, sampled at 1000 Hz, were recorded telemetrically for rectus femo-
ris (RF), biceps femoris (BF), medial hamstring (MH), and gluteus me-
dius (GM) muscles. During lab testing, subjects performed 5 leap land
trials for each leg, for 3 specific movement conditions of increasing com-
plexity, namely: (1) Run and leap land (Land); (2) Run, leap land while
catching a ball, pivot and pass to a teammate in the same movement (No
Def); (3) Break from a defender, run, leap land while catching a ball,
pivot and pass to a teammate in the same movement (Def). The point of
initial contact (IC) of the land leg, was first determined via video cam-
era recordings. EMG data were then analysed for each trial to determine
muscle onset relative to IC, and the resultant muscle burst duration that
occurred concurrent with IC. Specifically, the onset level was defined as
the point where muscle activation exceeded baseline levels by at least 1
SD for a minimum of 10 ms.3

INJuRY INCIDENT: The player ran for a ball that was going out of court. As
she reached the court boundary she performed an abrupt 1-legged stop.
As her foot was planted, she twisted/attempted to pivot whilst bringing
the ball back into play when she heard a snap. She attempted to continue
pivoting, however her leg gave way and she fell to the floor.

a22 | february 2007 | volume 37 | number 2 | journal of orthopaedic & sports 
physical therapy



RESuLTS: The ACL injured subject was the only player to record an on-
set post IC within her trials. These results were only found in the injured
limb compared with the noninjured limb. A total of 6 onset post IC trials
were recorded within the Def condition across all 4 muscles out of a pos-
sible 15 lands. Five onset post IC trials were recorded within the No Def
condition across RF and BF muscles only. No onset post IC trial was re-
corded for the least complex, Land condition.

DISCuSSION: A player will often sustain an ACL injury while performing
a common, albeit high-risk task. Results presented for this subject high-
light the potential for this to be explained. It has been found that muscle
activation patterns are pre-planned and activate prior to loading to coun-
ter potentially injurious moments.4 Therefore an onset post IC potential-
ly renders the knee joint extremely vulnerable to injury, relying on pre-
dominantly passive restraints to counter loading during high-risk tasks.
The ACL injured subject in this study performed the high-risk, landing
task the majority of times using an activation strategy prior to IC. During
the simple and less ‘game like’ landings, this activation strategy prior to
IC was consistent. However with increasing and more ‘game-like’ com-
plexity, the injured subject’s results suggest that she was unable to recruit
a functional level of activation prior to IC for up to 40% of her landings,
potentially increasing her chance of ligament injury.

CONCLuSION: While this is a single subject case report, it does provide
valuable insight into potential neuromuscular dysfunction prior to ACL
injury.

REFERENCES:

1. Griffin LY, Agel J, Albohm MJ, Arendt EA. Noncontact anterior cruciate 
ligament in-
juries: risk factors and prevention. J Am Acad Orthop Surg. 2000;8:141-150.

2. McLean SG, Walker K, Ford KR, Myer GD, Hewett TE, van den Bogert AJ. 
Evaluation
of a two dimensional analysis method as a screening and evaluation tool for 
ante-
rior cruciate ligament injury. Br J Sports Med. 2005;39:355-362.

3. Hodges PW, Bui BH. A comparison of computer-based methods for the determina-
tion of onset of muscle contraction using electromyography. Electroencephalogr
Clin Neurophysiol. 1996;101:511-519.

4. Besier TF, Lloyd DG, Ackland TR. Muscle activation strategies at the knee 
during
running and cutting maneuvers. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2003;35:119-127.

DIFFERENCES EXIST IN NEuROMuSCuLAR PATTERNS DuRING
uNANTICIPATED RuNNING AND CuTTING MANEuVERS BETWEEN ELITE
MALE  AND FEMALE SOCCER PLAYERS

Landry SC, McKean KA, Hubley-Kozey CL, Deluzio KJ,
Stanish WD

School of Biomedical Engineering, Dalhousie University, Halifax,
Canada; School of Physiotherapy, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Canada;
Department of Surgery (Orthopaedics), Dalhousie University, Halifax,
Canada

INTRODuCTION: The anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) is important for knee

joint stability and proper function, particularly during sporting activi-
ties that involve running, stopping, jumping, and cutting. Approximate-
ly 70% to 80% of these injuries are noncontact in nature and females
are 2 to 8 times more likely of sustaining an ACL injury than males. The
noncontact mechanism of this injury most often involves landing from a
jump or cutting to change directions during activities such as basketball
or soccer. The purpose of this study was to identify gender related neuro-
muscular differences of the lower limb in unanticipated running and cut-
ting maneuvers within an elite adolescent soccer population.

METhODS: Twenty-one male and 21 female elite adolescent soccer play-
ers underwent a complete 3-D kinematic, kinetic, and electromyograph-
ic (EMG) analysis of the lower limb, with only the EMG findings being
discussed in this abstract. Subjects were required to run at 3.5  0.2 m/

s down the laboratory runway and just prior to the right foot landing on

the force plate, a light system randomly cued the individuals to either (1)
cut to the left (side-cut), (2) continue running straight, or (3) cut to the
right (cross-cut). For the stance portion of the maneuver, muscle activa-

tion patterns of the rectus femoris, vastus medialis and lateralis, lateral
and medial hamstring, and medial and lateral gastrocnemius were col-
lected and then normalized to maximum voluntary isometric contrac-
tions (MVIC) against a Cybex dynamometer. Both cuts were made at 35°
to 60° from the direction of travel and muscle activation waveforms were
analyzed for gender and medial-lateral site differences using principal
component analysis (PCA).

RESuLTS: Both male (17.0  0.6 years) and female (16.6  1.1 years)
players had several years of soccer experience (M = 10.71.7 years, F

= 9.82.1) and had played or trained with the Nova Scotia provincial
and/or Canada Games soccer program. All players were injury free at the
time of testing, however, many reported previous minor lower limb in-
juries in their soccer careers (M = 62%, F = 86%). The males were sig-

nificantly taller (M = 1.77  0.04 m, F = 1.65  0.1 m) and heavier (M =

69.6  6.6 kg, F = 60.8  5.5 kg) than their female counterparts. Gas-
trocnemius activity during the 3 tasks was significantly greater in the
female group. Females demonstrated higher lateral gastrocnemius ac-
tivity compared to their medial gastrocnemius (P,.02) and also com-
pared to the lateral gastrocnemius of males during the first 60% to 70%
of stance (P,.002). There were no statistical differences between lateral
and medial gastrocnemius activity in the male group. The differences in
the hamstring muscles were more variable between the individual tasks.
The side-cut produced a statistically significant medial-lateral hamstring
imbalance in the males only, with males having a higher overall lateral
hamstring activation level compared to the medial hamstring (P = .02).
For the straight run, the only hamstring difference was that males had
higher lateral hamstring activity compared to females (P = .01) and for
the cross-cut, males demonstrated both higher lateral and medial ham-
string activity compared to the females (P,.05). With respect to gender
quadriceps differences, females had higher rectus femoris activity for all
3 tasks (P,.05) and higher vastus medialis and lateralis activity for the

straight run only (P,.05).

DISCuSSION: The most notable gender difference for all 3 unanticipated
tasks was that females had higher lateral gastrocnemius activity than
males and females also demonstrated a medial-lateral gastrocnemius
muscle imbalance during early to midstance that was not present in
males. Studies using a computer based model2 and a differential vari-
able transducer implanted on the ACL1 have shown that contraction of
the gastrocnemii alone or in combination with the quadriceps is able to
increase the load in the ACL. If the assumption that higher muscle acti-
vations result in larger muscle forces is followed, then the higher female
gastrocnemius muscle force in this study may be putting the ACL under
greater load compared to males, thereby increasing the likelihood of in-
jury to the ACL. The medial-lateral gastrocnemius imbalance present in
only females may also be contributing to less internal/external rotary sta-
bility, a motion that the ACL has an important role in resisting. In addi-
tion to the gastrocnemius gender differences between athletic tasks, the
females also tended to have higher activated quadriceps and/or lower
activated hamstrings. These findings may further increase the ACL load
and place the ligament at a higher risk of being injured in females.

CONCLuSION: Unanticipated athletic tasks have identified gastrocnemius,
quadriceps, and hamstrings muscle activation differences that are po-
tential contributors to the gender bias in ACL injury rates. The gas-
trocnemius imbalance and higher activity identified in this study for
females has not been previously reported in the literature. Similar Ab-
stract Presented At: ISB 2005 (Cleveland, Ohio) and CASM 2005 (Otta-
wa, Ontario).

REFERENCES:

1. Fleming BC, Renstrom PA, Ohlen G, et al. The gastrocnemius muscle is an 
antago-
nist of the anterior cruciate ligament. J Orthop Res. 2001;19:1178-1184.

2. O’Connor JJ. Can muscle co-contraction protect knee ligaments after injury 
or re-
pair? J Bone Joint Surg Br. 1993;75:41-48.

journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy | volume 37 | number 2 | 
february 2007 | a23



STRENGTh TRAINING FOR 6-WEEKS DOES NOT SIGNIFICANTLY ALTER
LANDING MEChANICS OF FEMALE COLLEGIATE BASKETBALL AThLETES

McGinn PA, Mattacola CG, Malone TR, Johnson DL, Shapiro R
Nova Southeastern University, Ft Lauderdale, FL; University of
Kentucky, Lexington, KY

INTRODuCTION: Landing mechanics employed by female athletes have

been considered a potential risk factor for lower extremity injuries.
This project compared the landing mechanics of 2 groups of collegiate
female basketball athletes (trained, untrained) to determine if changes
in lower extremity strength would alter landing mechanics.

METhODS: Data were collected in the University Biodynamics Labora-
tory and analyzed using a repeated measures design. Fifteen collegiate
(NCAA Division III and NAIA) female, right leg dominant, basketball
athletes volunteered for participation (age, 18.8  0.1 years; height,

175.1  6.1 cm; mass, 67.0  5.6 kg), and reported no history of low-

er extremity surgery or occurrence of a lower extremity injury within 3
months prior to testing. Baseline 3-dimensional hip and knee joint ki-
nematic data (120 FPS), and bilateral quadriceps (concentric, eccen-
tric) and hamstring (concentric) isokinetic strength data (180°/s) were
collected for each participant (pre-test, post test). Landing mechan-
ics were evaluated during 2 single-limb landing tasks (hop, step). The
trained group (n = 7) participated in supervised biweekly weight train-
ing sessions (squats, lunges, leg press, step-ups, hamstring curls, dead-
lifts) for 6-weeks, the untrained group (n = 8) did not. Kinematic data
used in reduction began 50 milliseconds prior to impact and ended
350 milliseconds after impact, to include the landing phase. KinTrack
software was used for post processing of kinematic data. All kinemat-
ic and strength data were statistically analyzed using SPSS, alpha lev-
el P,.05 (a priori).

RESuLTS: Data were evaluated using 2 × 2 repeated-measures ANO-

VA. Significant increases in strength occurred for the trained group.
Concentric hamstring and concentric quadriceps peak torque values
improved 14% (P = .012) and 8% (P = .004) from pretest, respective-
ly. Landing tasks yielded significant limb differences at the knee and
hip joint. The dominant limb landed with less hip flexion (4.9°  4.9°,
10.1°  3.6°) (P,.001), less knee flexion (12.2°  3.5°, 15.2°  4.0°) (P

= .007), more knee valgus (9.1°  4.2°, 6.2°  3.3°) (P = .013), and with
a larger medial/lateral ground reaction force when compared to the
nondominant limb (P = .011). Kinematic hip and knee joint data were
not significantly different after 6 weeks for either group.

DISCuSSION: The evidence presented from this project, supports increas-
es in concentric hamstring and quadriceps PT can occur after 6-weeks
of isotonic strength training; however these increases were not suffi-
cient to cause a change in landing mechanics during the posttest. Inter-
estingly, regardless of task, the nondominant limb landed in a position,
which placed less stress on the knee joint, compared to the dominant
limb. This leads the authors to question whether we need to re-eval-
uate the definition of “dominance.” Although evidence suggests that
comprehensive ACL intervention programs decrease ACL injuries be-
cause    of training, it is hypothesized that the strength-training com-
ponent of these programs may not be the most influential factor in
their success.

CONCLuSIONS: Our findings suggest that strength training alone does
not alter landing mechanics. However, based on previous literature
our findings imply that neuromuscular training, specifically focused on
motor control patterns, may be necessary for improvements in land-
ing kinematics. Presented at the National Athletic Trainers’ Association
Meeting, June 2006 and as a poster presentation at the Southeastern
Athletic Trainers’ Association Meeting, March 2005. Reproduced with
permission from the Journal of Athletic Training. 42(2), 2006. ©2006
National Athletic Trainers’ Association, Inc.

ThE EFFECTS OF STRENGTh TRAINING ON ThE NEuROMuSCuLAR
ChARACTERISTICS OF A STOP-JuMP TASK IN FEMALE RECREATIONAL
AThLETES

Herman DC, Weinhold PS, Guskiewicz KM, Garrett WE, Yu B,
Padua DA

University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC; Duke University,
Durham, NC

INTRODuCTION: Previous research has shown that females exhibit altered

neuromuscular characteristics at the knee and adjacent joints com-
pared to males during athletic tasks; furthermore, these differences
have been shown to increase the load and deformation of the anterior
cruciate ligament (ACL). ACL injury prevention protocols employing
various combinations of proprioception, balance, plyometric, strength,
and technique training have previously shown positive ACL injury pre-
vention effects; however, little is known about the relative contribu-
tions of these various training components to ACL injury prevention.
Furthermore, little is known about how these protocols alter the spe-
cific movement patterns and loading properties associated with ACL
injury. Due to the incidence, cost, and long-term disability of ACL in-
jury, it is important to understand the relative contribution and im-
portance of each component in injury prevention protocols to develop
maximal efficiency and effectiveness. This research focuses on the role
of strength training, which is a common modality in intervention pro-
tocols, in altering neuromuscular characteristics. We hypothesize that
a strength training protocol focusing on the knee and hip musculature
will alter the baseline neuromuscular characteristics in female subjects
during the landing phase of an athletic task (the stop-jump) that is as-
sociated with ACL injury.

METhODS: Three-dimensional videography, force plate, and maximum

voluntary isometric contraction (MVIC) dynamometry data were col-
lected for 11 healthy female recreational athletes (age, 24.8  2.7 years;
height, 1.65  .07 m; weight, 63.8  11.4 kg) before and after complet-
ing a 6-week strength training protocol. The strength training protocol
lasted 6 weeks with 3 training sessions per week lasting approximate-
ly 40 minutes each. The protocol employed 4 exercises targeting the
quadriceps, hamstrings, gluteus medius, and gluteus maximus. All ses-
sions were monitored to ensure proper technique, progression of resis-
tance, and compliance. Kinetic and kinematic parameters at the knee
and hip were estimated using an inverse dynamic procedure instru-
mented in a MS3-D computer program package. Dependent sample t
tests (a = .05) were employed to determine statistical significance.

RESuLTS: The quadriceps, hamstrings, gluteus medius, and gluteus max-
imus muscles increased in MVIC strength subsequent to the strength
training protocol (P,.001 for all muscles). Knee anterior shear force
(P   = .026) decreased and hip abduction angle (P = .005), hip abduc-
tion moment (.034), and hip flexion moment (P = .009) increased sub-
sequent to the strength training protocol.

DISCuSSION: The increased muscular strength about the knee and hip we
observed may act to help stabilize the knee joint during landing. De-
creased anterior knee shear force and increased hip flexion moment
may allow subjects to adopt a more controlled landing strategy rather
than using a “ligament dominant” landing strategy. Furthermore, in-
creased strength may allow for an “amplification effect” of other ACL
injury prevention modalities by providing the physical capacity for al-
tered motion patterns.

CONCLuSIONS: The results indicate that a 6-week single-modality inter-
vention using strength training can positively alter critical neuromus-
cular characteristics in female recreational athletes. Ultimately, this re-
search will help to provide clinicians with a foundation on which to
design effective ACL injury prevention protocols.

a24 | february 2007 | volume 37 | number 2 | journal of orthopaedic & sports 
physical therapy



ThE EFFECTS OF STRENGTh AND PLYOMETRIC TRAINING ON JOINT
POSITION AND JOINT MOMENTS OF ThE FEMALE KNEE

Trowbridge CA, Ricard MD, Knight KL, Hopkins JT, Draper
DO, Hilton SC

University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX; Brigham Young
University, Provo, UT

INTRODuCTION: Female athletes experience a 2 to 6 times greater chance

of noncontact anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) injury. Previous research
has indicated that specific prevention training programs can reduce the
number of female knee injuries; however, we do not know how different
training programs affect the specific mechanics of different sport activi-
ties. The purpose of this study was to determine the effects of plyomet-
ric and strength training programs on the kinematics and kinetics of the
knee joint during various performance conditions.

METhODS: A 2 × 3 × 3 × 6 factorial design was used. The factors were time
(pretest and posttest), training program (control, plyometric training,
and traditional strength training), trial replication (3 trials), and perfor-
mance condition (run, deceleration run, cut 45°, deceleration cut 45°,
drop landing, and single-leg hop). Time, replication, and performance
condition were repeated measures. Thirty-six healthy female recreation-
al athletes (age, 21.4  0.1 years; height, 165.1  2.6 cm; mass, 63.3 

2.9 kg) with the inability to maintain knee joint stabilization when per-

forming functional tasks were the subjects. Separate 6-week plyometric
and strength training programs were used. Pretesting and posttesting oc-
curred within a week of the assigned training program. The order of per-
formance conditions was counterbalanced using a 6 × 6 balanced-Latin
square. Running and cutting speed (4.0 to 5.0 m/s) were monitored by
timing lights. Drop landing was from 46 cm and single-leg hop was per-
formed at a distance of 45% of subject’s height. The right foot was the
plant foot for all conditions. All data were collected in the Human Per-
formance Research Center Laboratory. Kinetic data were collected using
an imbedded force plate. Kinematic data were collected using a 5-cam-
era phase locked motion analysis system integrated with the force plate.
Dependent variables included joint angles and internal joint moments in
3 planes during the weight acceptance phase. Weight acceptance was the
average of all the points between the initial contact and maximum knee
flexion. Custom software used the Euler angle convention to calculate
knee joint angles and used inverse dynamics to calculate internal joint
moments. Change scores (posttest-pretest) were analyzed with 3 × 6 re-
peated measure factorial ANOVAs. Mixed models accounted for the vari-
ance between subjects. Alpha level was set a priori to .05. If group-by-
condition differences were detected among the training programs, then
post hoc testing was used.

RESuLTS: The plyometric group had significant increases in their knee

flexion angles for the deceleration cut (P,.003), the drop landing
(P,.0001), and the single-leg hop (P,.0007) when compared to the con-
trol group. Significant results were obtained when the plyometric group
was compared to the strength group for the drop landing (P,.0006) and
the single-leg hop (P,.0006). The plyometric group increased their av-
erage flexion angle up to 8° for both the drop landing and single-leg hop
and up to 4° for the deceleration cut. The plyometric group also demon-
strated a greater extensor torque at the posttest for the 45° cut than the
control (P,.03) and strength (P,.0003) groups. The control and plyo-
metric groups exhibited lesser valgus moments during posttesting, but
only the plyometric groups’ decreased valgus moment for the 45° cut cor-
responded with an angular change.

DISCuSSION: It appears that plyometrics can modify technique and mus-
cle force during cutting and landing conditions. The clinical application
of these findings is relevant to the prevention of the “position of no re-
turn,” because an increase in flexion angle at foot planting or landing, an
increase in extensor moment, and a reduction in the valgus moment and
the external rotary moment might prevent the knee from collapsing into
the position of injury. Therefore, plyometric training may be used to treat
ligament dominance, quadriceps dominance, and leg dominance, which

are often seen in female athletes.

CONCLuSIONS: These data support the role of plyometric training in im-
proving deceleration and landing. Our findings indicate that the plyo-
metric group might have improved functional joint stability more than
the strength group. Further research is encouraged to investigate the role
of different prevention programs in the establishment of functional joint
stability. This abstract was presented at National Athletic Trainers’ Asso-
ciation Annual Meeting and Symposium, June 2005, Indianapolis, IN.
Reproduced with permission from the Journal of Athletic Training. 40(2
Suppl):S90, 2005. ©2005 National Athletic Trainers’ Association, Inc.

SEX DIFFERENCES AND TRIAL-TO-TRIAL VARIABILITY IN LANDING
PARAMETERS IN BASKETBALL REBOuNDING WITh ChILDREN

Winter TJ, Orlik JR, Livingston LA

Dalhousie University, Halifax, Canada

INTRODuCTION: Given the additional complications of orthopaedic treat-
ment for ACL rupture in skeletally immature patients,1 injury preven-
tion is imperative.2 Considerable effort has been devoted to examining
the sex difference in ACL injury in teenagers and adults, yet few have
addressed the same issue in children.3 The purpose of this study was
to investigate sex differences and variability in landing impact forces
and CoP characteristics during the completion of a simulated and con-
trolled, yet ecologically valid, basketball rebounding task with 8- to 10-
year-old children.

METhODS: Children aged 8 to 10 years (10 boys, 10 girls) performed re-
peated trials of a simulated rebounding task. Traditional measures
of impact forces (ie, normalized peak vertical ground reaction force
(NPvGRF), loading rate [NvGRFLR]) and centre of pressure (CoP) pa-
rameters (ie, total CoP excursion path length (DCoP), elapsed time for
CoP excursion (CoPt), and velocity of CoP excursion [CoPvel]) were the
landing parameters of interest, while video cameras were used to cap-
ture images of the participants’ jumping techniques. Between-group
(male, female) and within-participant (trial) variability was quantified
to investigate variability patterns for each dependent variable. Descrip-
tive statistics and 1-way ANOVAs were used to evaluate between-sex
differences and individual extreme-case comparisons for all variables.
Qualitative methods were used to interpret CoP trajectory patterns and
base-of-support (BoS) characteristics.

RESuLTS: No significant between-group differences were detected for
any of the landing impact or CoP variables. Significant differences were
noted, however, between individuals demonstrating high within-par-
ticipant variability when contrasted to participants demonstrating low
within-participant variability. Significant differences in extreme cases
of within-participant variability were noted for PvGRF (F1,6 = 102.882,

P,.001), DCoP (F1,10 = 20.462, P,.001), CoPt (F1,10 = 26.411, P,.001),

and CoPvel (F1,8 = 30.369, P,.001). Differences in extreme cases of
within-participant variability of NvGRFLR (F1,8 = 5.808, P,.053) ap-
proached significance. These individual differences were supported by

qualitative observations of variability in patterns of impact measures
and CoP parameters. Some individuals demonstrating more variabili-
ty in the dependent measures also seemed to demonstrate less mature
jumping form than individuals who demonstrated less variablity (ie,
consistency) in performance across trials. No consistent sex differences
were noted for CoP trajectory or BoS characteristics although individu-
al differences in variability across trials were evident.

DISCuSSION: A trend of higher PNvGRF and NvGRFLR magnitude was
observed for females, although males tended to demonstrate larger vari-
ability measures for the same variables. Females also tended to demon-
strate larger CoP displacement, which may indicate lower balance con-
trol than male participants. Observed impact forces were proportionally
higher than in previous drop-jump studies, indicating that drop jumping
may be an overly conservative representation of a high-risk movement.
Extreme-case comparisons highlighted differences in experimental vari-
ables  and landing technique. Participants demonstrating low within-par-

journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy | volume 37 | number 2 | 
february 2007 | a25



ticipant variability tended toward a more mature, controlled jumping
technique. Limitations in experimental task control, temporal normal-
ization of CoP variables, and small sample size may have contributed to
a lack of significant findings.

CONCLuSIONS: No significant sex differences were observed, however the
data provide an important baseline against which the results of future
studies with children may be compared. In addition, positive participant
reports and qualitative observations suggest that the experimental task
provided a valid simulation of a true basketball situation.

REFERENCES:

1. Kocher MS, Saxon HS, Hovis WD, Hawkins RJ. Management and complications of
anterior cruciate ligament injuries in skeletally immature patients: survey of 
the
Herodicus Society and The ACL Study Group. J Pediatr Orthop. 2002;22:452-457.

2. Hewett TE, Myer GD, Ford KR. Prevention of anterior cruciate ligament 
injuries.

Curr Womens Health Rep. 2001;1:218-224.

3. Loud KJ, Micheli LJ. Common athletic injuries in adolescent girls. Curr Opin 
Pedi-
atr. 2001;13:317-322.

VARIABILITY IN COORDINATION OF LEG KINEMATICS IN MALES AND
FEMALES DuRING TREADMILL RuNNING

Mullineaux DR, Dierks TA, Davis IS

Lexington KY, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN; Drayer Physical
Therapy Institute, Milford, PA; University of Delaware, Newark, DE
INTRODuCTION: Sex differences in movement patterns have been associ-
ated  with increased risk of anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) injuries in
females. The variability in movement is becoming of increasing interest
to biomechanists. In the past, greater variability has been viewed as in-
dicative of poor technique (Davids et al, 1997) or associated with a more
adaptable and healthy state (Hamill et al, 1999). Decreased variability
may result in a less flexible system and greater consistency in loading
that may contribute to an increased risk for injury. Therefore, the aim
of this study was to compare variability in coordination between males
and females during treadmill running. It was hypothesized that females
would exhibit less variability in coordination compared to their male
counterparts.

METhODS: Five female (age, 23.6  5.5 years; mass, 60.7  7.9 kg) and
5 male (age, 24.4  9.4 years; mass, 71.9  1.8 kg) healthy recreational
runners participated in this study. Kinematic data for 3 consecutive tri-

als running at 2.68  0.36 m.s-1 on a treadmill were recorded at 120 Hz
using a 6-camera 3-D VICON motion analysis system (Oxford Metrics
Ltd, UK). Data were low-pass filtered at 8 Hz using a fourth order zero

Results for the 3 Methods of Coordination Variability

KIR-hIR

RMSD     VC     CRPsd

Females      4  5    0.73  0.07    13  6

Males       5  7    0.73  0.08    19  10

% diff        –20      0        32

Effect size      0.17      0.00      0.75

KIR-REV

RMSD     VC     CRPsd

Females      3  4    0.69  0.11    16  6

Males       7  6    0.71  0.03    19  14

% diff        –57      –3       16

Effect size      0.80      0.29      0.30

lag Butterworth filter. Data from 5 frames before and after stance were
normalized to 101 data points. Knee internal rotation (KIR), hip internal
rotation (HIR), and rearfoot eversion (REV) were calculated. Root mean
square difference (RMSD ratio of 2 variables), vector coding (VC cooeffi-
cient, Tepavac and Field-Fote 2001) and continuous relative phase stan-
dard deviation (CRPsd phase angle, Hamill et al, 1999) were used to an-
alyze variability in the coordination of leg kinematics. The variability in
the coordination between KIR with HIR and KIR with REV were calcu-
lated for each of the 101 data points and averaged. Sex differences were
presented as percentage differences (% diff) and effect sizes.

RESuLTS: See TABLE.

DISCuSSION: Variability in coordination between various knee kinemat-
ics with either ankle or hip joint kinematics was consistently lower in fe-
male runners. The variability was at least 15% less in females when cal-
culated using RMSD or CRPsd, although this difference was negligible
when calculated using VC. Generally greater effect sizes of at least mod-
erate size existed for the REV-KIR coupling suggesting that the variabil-
ity difference between sexes was greater for the rearfoot-knee coupling
as opposed to the hip-knee coupling.

CONCLuSION: The data support that variability in leg kinematics is less for
females than males during treadmill running. Further work, including
using larger sample sizes, is required to verify the findings and to assess
the importance of coordination variability on ACL injuries.

REFERENCES:

1. Davids K, et al. In: Lidor R, Bar-Eli M, eds. Innovations in Sport 
Psychology: Linking
Theory and Practice. Netanya, Israel: International Society of Sports 
Psychology;
1997.

2. Hamill J, van Emmerik RE, Heiderscheit BC, Li L. A dynamical systems approach
to lower extremity running injuries. Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon). 
1999;14:297-308.

3. Field-Fote EC, Tepavac D. Improved intralimb coordination in people with 
incom-
plete spinal cord injury following training with body weight support and 
electrical
stimulation. Phys Ther. 2002;82:707-715.

ANTERIOR TIBIAL ShEAR FORCE AND KNEE VALGuS ANGLE ARE
INFLuENCED BY LOWER EXTREMITY KINEMATICS, MuSCLE STRENGTh,
AND LANDING TEChNIQuE

Padua DA, Marshall SW, Beutler AI, DeMaio M, Yu B, Thigpen
CA, Boling MC, Garrett WE

University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC; United
States Naval Academy, Annapolis, MD; Duke University, Durham, NC
INTRODuCTION: Anterior tibial shear force (ATSF) and knee valgus angle
(KVA)  are described to increase ACL loading, thus may be important
factors that influence ACL injury risk. Previous research demonstrates
gender differences in peak ATSF and KVA during cutting and jumping
tasks. Understanding how factors other than gender influence ATSF and
KVA may lead to the development of injury prevention interventions to
reduce the risk of ACL injury. Therefore, the purpose of this study was
to identify the influence of lower extremity kinematics, muscle strength,
and landing technique on ATSF and KVA.

METhODS: A total 117 participants took part in this study (males, 63; fe-
males, 54). An electromagnetic tracking system and nonconductive force
plate were used to measure joint kinematics and ATSF (normalized to
body weight) during a jump-landing task. A hand-held dynamometer
was used to assess the force produced (normalized to body weight) dur-
ing isometric contraction for the following muscles: gluteus maximus,
gluteus medius, hip external rotators, hip internal rotators, quadriceps,
and hamstrings. The Landing Error Scoring System (LESS), which is a
novel clinical movement assessment tool, was used to quantify an indi-
vidual’s jump-landing technique based on review of frontal and sagittal
plane video imagery. Separate forward stepwise multiple regression anal-
yses were performed to determine the relationship for ATSF and KVA
with knee and hip kinematics as well as muscle strength. To investigate
the influence of landing technique on ATSF and KVA the sample was di-

a26 | february 2007 | volume 37 | number 2 | journal of orthopaedic & sports 
physical therapy



chotomized into groups: high error and low error. Subjects whose LESS
scores were in the lower 25th percentile were assigned to the low error
group (n = 28). Subjects whose LESS scores were in the upper 25th per-
centile were assigned to high error group (n = 30). Separate 1-way ANO-
VAs were used to compare ATSF and KVA between the high and low er-
ror groups (a,.05).

RESuLTS: Regression analyses for peak ATSF revealed that both knee and

hip flexion at initial contact were significant predictors of peak ATSF (R2

= 0.461, P = .001). However, muscle strength was not shown to be pre-
dictive of peak ATSF (P..05). Regression analyses for KVA involving
hip and knee kinematics revealed that both hip adduction and hip ro-
tation were significant predictors of knee valgus at initial contact (R2 =

.67, P,.05) and peak knee valgus (R2 = .48, P,.05). In addition, gluteus
medius strength was the only significant predictor of KVA at initial con-
tact (R2 = .06, P,.05) and peak knee valgus (R2 = .07, P,.05), although
this may be considered low predictive power. Landing technique also in-
fluenced peak ATSF as the high error group demonstrated significantly
greater peak ATSF (P,.05) compared to the low error group, however
there was no difference in KVA (P..05) between groups.

DISCuSSION: Nearly half of the variance in peak proximal ATSF is ex-

plained by knee and hip flexion angle at initial contact during a jump-
landing task. Individuals displaying less knee and hip flexion experienced
greater peak ATSF. Also, individuals who displayed poor landing tech-
nique experienced greater peak ATSF than those with good landing tech-
nique. Thus, knee and hip flexion and landing technique appear to be
important factors in controlling peak proximal ATSF. Individuals with
greater hip adduction and rotation and reduced gluteus medius strength
demonstrated greater KVA. These findings demonstrate the importance
of hip motion and strength for controlling KVA.

CONCLuSION: Several factors other than gender influence peak ATSF and
KVA during a jump-landing task. Specifically, lower extremity kinemat-
ics, muscle strength, and landing technique were all shown to influence
peak ATSF and KVA. These findings may have implications in under-
standing ACL injury risk factors and in the design of ACL injury preven-
tion programs.(Funded by the National Institutes of Arthritis and Mus-
culoskeletal and Skin Disorders Division of NIH (RO1-AR050461001)
and  the American Orthopaedic Society for Sports Medicine).

NON-WEIGhT BEARING ANTERIOR KNEE LAXITY IS RELATED TO ANTERIOR
TIBIAL TRANSLATION DuRING TRANSITION FROM NONWEIGhT BEARING
TO WEIGhT BEARING

Shultz SJ, Shimokochi Y, Nguyen AH, Ambegaonkar JP,
Schmitz RJ, Beynnon BD, Perrin DH

University of North Carolina at Greensboro, Greensboro, NC
INTRODuCTION: Females have greater anterior knee laxity (AKL) compared
to  males, yet the effect of this increased laxity on knee joint mechanics
during weight bearing has not been examined. We examine the relation-
ship between nonweight bearing AKL and the anterior translation of the
tibia relative to the femur (ATT) that is produced when a subject transi-
tions from nonweight bearing to weight bearing postures.

METhODS: The right knee of 21 subjects (11 M, 10 F; 25.3  4.0 years,

170.4  11.5 cm, 72.4  16.9 kg) was measured for AKL and ATT on
2 occasions approximately 24-48 hours apart. AKL was measured at
133 N with the KT-2000 (MEDmetric Corp; San Diego, CA). ATT was
measured with the subject supine in the Vermont Knee Laxity Device

(VKLD; University of Vermont, Burlington, VT). The VKLD allows con-
trolled loading of the tibiofemoral joint by first creating a zero shear load
condition across the knee while it is unweighted to establish an initial
neutral position of the tibia relative to the femur, then applying a com-
pressive load of 40% body weight through the ankle and hip axes to sim-
ulate weight-bearing. Electromagnetic position sensors (Ascension Tech-
nologies, Colchester, VT) attached to the patella and the anteromedial
aspect of the tibia measured anterior-posterior displacement of the tibia
relative to the femur. The average of 3 trials for each measure was ana-

lyzed. Intraclass Correlation Coefficients (ICC2,k) and Standard Error of
Measurements (SEM) confirmed day to day measurement consistency,
and linear regression examined the relationship between AKL and ATT.
RESuLTS: Means  SD for AKL and ATT respectively were 7.4  2.6 mm
and 7.2  2.3 mm for day 1, and 7.5  2.3 mm and 6.5  2.5 mm for day

2. Measurement consistency was high for AKL (ICC = .97; SEM = 0.4
mm) and ATT (ICC = .88, SEM = 0.8 mm). Linear regression indicated
that AKL predicted 35.3% of the variance in ATT (P = .005), with a pre-
diction equation of YATT = 3.22 + .531 (XAKL).

DISCuSSION: While knee joint laxity has been identified as a predictor of

ACL injury risk in females, the mechanism for this relationship has re-
ceived little attention. Our findings indicate that this mechanism may in
part be a biomechanical phenomenon, with greater anterior knee laxity
potentially leading to greater anterior displacement of the tibia relative
to the femur upon initial ground contact. Whether this modest increase
in joint displacement in an otherwise healthy knee is sufficient to disrupt
normal joint biomechanics and increase risk of ligament injury requires
further study. It is also recognized that other factors can influence ante-
rior-posterior displacement behavior of the knee during weight bearing,
(thus the relationship between AKL and ATT), namely muscle activity
and joint geometry (eg, knee flexion angle and the anterior-to-posterior
slope of the tibia). Future work is planned to clarify the relationship be-
tween AKL and ATT while accounting for these variables, and compar-
ing these relationships in males and females.

CONCLuSIONS: These data suggest that increased AKL is associated with
increased anterior displacement of the tibia relative to the femur at ini-
tial ground contact. The potential for disruption of normal knee biome-
chanics during activities such as landing from a jump, or the foot strike
phase of gait deserves further study. Previously presented at the First
World Congress of Sport Injury Prevention, Oslo, Norway, July, 2005.
Reproduced with permission from the British Journal of Sports Medicine.
39(6):401, 2005. ©2005 BMJ Publishing Group.

GENDER DIMORPhISM IN KNEE JOINT MEChANICS AFFECTS ACL LOADING

Mizuno K, Andrish JT, van den Bogert AJ, McLean SG
Department of Biomedical Engineering and Orthopaedic Research Center,
Cleveland Clinic, OH

INTRODuCTION: The gender disparity in ACL injuries is commonly attrib-

uted to a series of gender-based neuromuscular variations.1,2 Current in-
jury prevention programs thus predominantly teach females to adopt
what are considered safer “male-like” movement strategies. The poten-
tial for gender differences in ACL loading, and hence injury risk, stem-
ming from gender dimorphic knee mechanics however, has not been ad-
dressed. If this is indeed the case, then a global prevention strategy may
ultimately contribute to, rather than reduce injury risk in many females.
The current study aimed to determine whether the ACL in the female
knee experiences larger strain than its male counterpart, under applica-
tion of the same 3-dimensional (3-D) knee joint loading state.

METhODS: Continuously varying joint loads were applied to 5 male (57.5

 13.4 years) and 5 female (58.3  11.5 years) cadaveric specimens via
a custom-designed manual-loading device and were simultaneously re-
corded with a 6 DOF load cell fixed to the tibia (FIGuRE 1). Synchronous
knee flexion data were recorded via an electro-goniometer secured across
the joint. ACL strain was also recorded via a microminiature DVRT (Mi-
crostrain, Burlington, VT) attached to the anterior-medial bundle of the
ligament (AMB). In each specimen, data were collected at 10 Hz while
flexion angle and loads were varied continuously for approximately 15
minutes. Regression analyses were applied to data outputs to determine
the relationship between ACL strain and 7 independent factors: ante-
rior-posterior, medial-lateral and compression force, flexion-extension,
varus-valgus and internal-external rotation torques, and knee flexion an-
gle. Each series of specimen data were fit to the following model:

ε = a₀ + ∑ bi xi + ∑ 
∑ cij xi x j

i =1    i =1 j =1

journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy | volume 37 | number 2 | 
february 2007 | a27



HANDLE

COMPRESSION
FORCE

valgus and internal rotation load compared to males. Further work is re-
quired to elucidate how these combined factors manifest within the non-
contact ACL injury mechanism in both men and women.

CONCLuSION: Gender dimorphic knee joint mechanics are evident under
application of combined valgus and internal rotation knee loading. This
outcome may contribute directly to the increased risk of noncontact ACL
injuries in women and should be considered within current prevention
paradigms.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT: Funded by CCF RPC (RPC 07206).


LOAD CELL

REFERENCES:

1. Hewett TE, Myer GD, Ford KR, et al. Biomechanical measures of neuromuscular
control and valgus loading of the knee predict anterior cruciate ligament 
injury risk
in female athletes: a prospective study. Am J Sports Med. 2005;33:492-501.

2. McLean SG, Huang X, van den Bogert AJ. Association between lower extremity
posture at contact and peak knee valgus moment during sidestepping: implica-
tions for ACL injury. Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon). 2005;20:863-870.

3. Kanamori A, Woo SL, Ma CB, et al. The forces in the anterior cruciate 
ligament and
knee kinematics during a simulated pivot shift test: A human cadaveric study us-
ing robotic technology. Arthroscopy. 2000;16:633-639.


FIGuRE 1. Illustration of manual loading device.

(1) where,  corresponds to AMB strain and xi is the ith independent load-
ing variable. After least-squares fitting to obtain specimen-specific regres-
sion coefficients, model efficacies were evaluated via cross validation. A

clinically relevant 3-D knee joint loading state, comprising combined val-
gus (10 Nm) and internal rotation torque (10 Nm) was then input into
each validated model, at flexion angles of 0°, 15°, 30°, 60°, and 90°.3 Re-
sulting ACL strains were computed using equation (1) and submitted to a
2-way ANOVA to test for main effects of gender and flexion angle.

RESuLTS: Male and female regression models predicted ACL strain with-
in 0.51%  0.10% and 0.52%  0.07% of the measured data respective-
ly, and in each case explained more than 75% of the variance. The strain
response in each model was consistent with previous research, with fe-
males eliciting significantly larger (P,.05) strains than males (FIGuRE 2)
DISCuSSION: Current results show that the female ACL undergoes greater
loading than the male ACL for the same external knee load state. Train-
ing females to adopt male neuromuscular patterns may be thus unable to

eliminate the gender disparity in injury rates. Rather, movement strate-
gies accommodating for gender, if not individual differences in underlying
joint mechanics, may be necessary. It is not known which joint mechani-
cal factors precipitate larger ACL strains in women. It is possible that the
female ACL experiences the same force as the male, but is more compli-
ant and undergoes larger strains. Another possibility is that female knee
geometry potentiates larger ACL forces when subjected to a combined

GENDER DIFFERENCE IN PASSIVE KNEE JOINT PROPERTIES uNDER TIBIAL
ROTATION

Park HS, Ahn C, Zhang L-Q

Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL
INTRODuCTION: The anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) is an important
structure for controlling knee joint movement and maintaining stabili-
ty. The incidence rate of ACL injury is 2 to 8 times higher in women than
in men.1 ACL impingement against intercondylar notch during excessive
tibial external rotation and abduction has been considered as 1 of the
mechanisms of ACL injury, especially in women.2 On one hand, the in-
tercondylar notch geometry (“narrower,” loosely speaking) makes it more
likely for female knees to have ACL impingement than male knees.2 On

CLAMP

EXTERNAL


7

ANKLE CAST

6

5        *

4               *

3                      *

LED MARKERS
INTERNAL

2


1

0   0      15

MALE

30

KNEE FLEXION (deg)

FEMALE

60     90

6-AXIS FORCE
SENSOR

SERVO MOTOR


FIGuRE 2. Gender comparisons of predicted strains under application of a 
combined
10-Nm valgus and 10-Nm internal tibial torques.

FIGuRE 1. (Park et al.)

a28 | february 2007 | volume 37 | number 2 | journal of orthopaedic & sports 
physical therapy



8     Male

Female

6

4

InItNeTrEmRMeEdDiIAaTtEeRROToAtTaIOtNion

2    at 2 deATg2/Ndemg/Nm

0

-2

Stiffness

-4   aSTtIF7FNNEmSS

AT 7 Nm

-6

-8

EENnEeRGrYgLyOLSSoss
00NNmm�~77NNmm

TeTrmERiMnIaNAl LRotation

RaOtTA7TNIOmN AT 7 Nm

was cast for tight coupling. Optotrak markers on the flat tibia surface
measure the angle of tibial rotation.

RESuLTS AND DISCuSSION: Under the controlled load, women showed sig-
nificantly higher laxity in tibial external rotation with larger terminal ro-
tation (26.7°  7.1° versus 19.2°  3.8°, P = .005) and larger intermediate

rotation (23.3°  7.6° in women versus 14.8°  4.5° in men, P = .0017).

Women also showed lower joint stiffness in external rotation (35.0 

11.9 Nm/rad versus 44.5  6.6 Nm/rad in men, P = .028). In contrast,
there was no significant difference in the passive knee properties in tib-
ial internal rotation between the men and women. Intermediate rota-
tion at 2 deg/Nm, terminal rotation at 7 Nm, stiffness and energy loss

at 7 Nm are shown.

CONCLuSIONS: With the narrower notch and larger laxity in tibial exter-
nal rotation, female knees are more prone to having ACL impingement
and thus ACL injury. This study presents an in vivo and accurate charac-
terization of knee biomechanical properties in tibial rotation in men and
women, which may help us understand the mechanisms underlying the


-30   -20   -10    0    10    20    30

JOINT ANGLE (deg)

MALE     FEMALE

FIGuRE 2. Typical tibial rotation torque angle relationship in a man and a 
woman.

70

60

50        *

40  *

30

20

10

0

several fold higher ACL injury rate in women than in men. Clinically, re-
habilitation protocols may be developed accordingly to strengthen mus-
cles crossing the knee and modify joint properties in tibial external rota-
tion, especially in women, to reduce ACL injuries.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT: This work was supported in part by NIH and
NIDRR.

REFERENCES:

1. Gwinn DE, Wilckens JH, McDevitt ER, Ross G, Kao TC. The relative incidence 
of an-
terior cruciate ligament injury in men and women at the United States Naval 
Acad-
emy. Am J Sports Med. 2000;28:98-102.

2. Fung DT, Zhang LQ. Modeling of ACL impingement against the intercondylar 
notch.

Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon). 2003;18:933-941.

3. Mills OS, Hull ML. Rotational flexibility of the human knee due to 
varus/valgus and
axial moments in vivo. J Biomech. 1991;24:673-690


T.R.

(deg)

INT. R.

(deg)

STIFFNESS E.LOSS

(Nm/rad) (10-2 J)

T.R.

(deg)

INT. R.

(deg)

STIFFNESS E.LOSS

(Nm/rad) (10-2 J)

3-D ANALYSIS OF ACL IMPINGEMENT BASED ON INDIVIDuAL PATIENTS’


EXTERNAL ROTATION

INTERNAL ROTATION

MRI DATA


MALE     FEMALE

FIGuRE 3. Passive knee joint properties in tibial rotation in men and women.

the other hand, women may have larger laxity in tibial rotation and ab-
duction than men, which also makes it more likely for women to have
ACL impingement than men under the same knee loading. The purpose
of this study was to evaluate passive knee joint properties in tibial rota-
tion in male and female subjects.

METhODS: Twenty subjects (10 men and 10 women) were seated in a cus-
tom designed joint driving device (FIGuRE 1). The knee and hip flexion
angles were 60° and 80°, respectively. The ankle was cast in the neutral
position and coupled to 1 end of an L-shaped aluminum angle located
distal and posterior to the foot-ankle cast. The L-shaped attachment was
mounted onto the motor shaft through a 6-axis force sensor. To measure
tibial rotation angles, LED markers were attached on the bony and flat
anteromedial surface of the tibia, and the 3-D movements of the mark-
ers  were measured by an Optotrak system at 100 Hz. The lateral move-
ment of femur was constrained by clamping the lateral and medial femo-
ral condyles to the seat (FIGuRE 1). The zero tibial rotation was taken with
the second toe pointing forward. With the position and torque limits set
at the internal and external directions, the motor rotated the tibia at the
constant speed of 1.5°/s within the limits. Joint laxity in tibial rotation
is measured in 2 ways: (1) terminal rotation measured at 7 Nm torque,
and (2) intermediate rotation measured at the slope of 2 deg/Nm.3 Joint
stiffness and energy loss in tibial rotation were measured at 15° rotation
(shaded area in FIGuRE 2). FIGuRE 1: Experimental setup for knee axial ro-
tation. The servo motor rotates the knee about the tibial long axis with
the 6-axis forces/moments measured by the JR3 force sensor. The ankle

Fung DT, Hendrix RW, Koh JL, Zhang L-Q

Sensory Motor Performance Program, Rehabilitation of Chicago; Depart-
ments of Biomedical Engineering, Radiology, Orthopaedic Surgery, and
Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL
INTRODuCTION: While many noncontact ACL injuries may have resulted
from  direct over-stretching of the ligament, the ACL may also be injured
due to its impingement against the intercondylar notch. Previous stud-
ies presented mixed views on whether the shape of the notch as seen on
planar radiographic and CT images predisposes the injury,1 with gender-
specific implications. Considering the complex shape of the notch, the
oblique alignment of the ACL, and anatomical variations among individ-
uals, there is a need to evaluate ACL impingement in 3-D space accurate-
ly in individual knees. The purpose of this study was to develop a model-
ing method to evaluate/predict ACL impingement in individual subjects
using 3-D MRI data of their injured/uninjured knees with corroboration
of laser-scanned and MRI data from cadaver specimens.

METhODS: MR images of the knee were acquired from 1 female cadaver-
ic specimen (F1) 6 human subjects (4 female: F2-F5; 2 males: M1, M2)
in the axial plane at full knee extension with 120 slices spaced at 1 mm
and a FOV of 160 × 160 mm in images of 512 × 512 elements. The con-
tour curves that outline the planar shape of the femur and the tibia in-
cluding articular cartilage, and the ACL, partitioned into its AM, I, and
PL bands,2 were defined using the spline function in the scanned axi-
al images, and the sagittal and coronal images derived from the volu-
metric MRI data. Interpolated images were generated on oblique planes
along the ACL’s orientation, allowing clear visualization of its broad at-
tachment sites and multiband morphology (FIGuRE 1). Additional con-
tours describing the ACL were defined in these obliquely oriented im-
ages. Displaying the spatial data from all orthogonal and oblique planes

journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy | volume 37 | number 2 | 
february 2007 | a29


A                        B                    D

C                   E

FIGuRE 1. Geometric reconstruction of the knee (A) using MR images on scanned 
axial, and interpolated oblique coronal (B, D) and oblique sagittal (C, E) 
planes.


in 3-D space resulted in an accurate reconstruction of the knee (FIGuRE 1).
After obtaining volumetric MRI, the cadaveric specimen (F1) was dis-
sected thoroughly, removing all the soft tissue and leaving only the stubs
of the origin and insertion of the ACL intact. The geometry of the femur
was then acquired using a 3-D laser scanner (LPX-250, Roland). The
MR-reconstructed and laser-scanned datasets were aligned with each

other by registration and evaluated for discrepancy to validate the accu-
racy of the MR reconstruction. Based on the MR-reconstructed dataset,
anatomical landmarks were identified to define the joint coordinate sys-
tem.3  A number of kinematic movement sequences that approximate the
knee’s range of motion were simulated. Spatial data that represent the
lateral notch wall were extracted and transformed into a local coordinate
system in which the spatial data points appear to form a surface in the


A 50

40

30

20

10

0

B  1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0      1      2      3      4      5

TIME (s)

FLEX      ABD.      ER

F1 (AM)

F1 (I)

F2 (AM)

F2 (I)

F2 (PL)

F3 (AM)

F3 (I)

F4 (AM)

M1 (AM)

local x and y directions with single z values. The data points were fitted
using bicubic splines with continuity up to the second derivative. The lo-
cations of the origin and insertion of the AM, I and PL bands during the
sequences were determined and then transformed into the local coordi-
nate system. Evaluation of potential impingement of the multiple ACL
bands against the lateral notch wall was performed by implementing a
validated mathematical algorithm,4 which (1) detects for the occurrence
of impingement during the movement sequences, and (2) determines
the path (and the corresponding strain) that characterizes the deformed
shape of the ACL band as it wrapped around the fitted surface when im-
pingement was detected.

RESuLTS: The MR-reconstructed and laser-scanned femurs matched very
well, yielding a discrepancy of 0.43  0.31 mm (mean  SD). Impinge-
ment was detected in 3 female and 1 male knees (F1, F2, F3, F4, and M1).
Analysis results showed that, during tibial external rotation and abduc-

tion movement at moderate knee flexion, the ACL impinged against the
lateral notch wall, with more impingement in the AM than the I band,
and the I band more than the PL band (FIGuRE 2), although the I or PL
may not necessarily be impinged.

CONCLuSIONS: The model provides a useful tool to analyze ACL impinge-
ment as a noncontact injury mechanism accurately in 3-D space on an
individual basis. The model may be used to study both injured and un-
injured knees of a wide range of geometries under various kinematic po-
sitions and help us understand ACL injury mechanisms and prevent po-


0

0      1      2      3      4      5

Time (s)

FIGuRE 2. (A) A representative kinematic sequence simulated in the 
MR-reconstruct-
ed knees. (B) Strain of the ACL resulting from impingement.

tential injuries.:

REFERENCES:

1. Arendt EA, Agel J, Dick RW. The profile of the ACL-injured athlete: a pilot 
study.
In: Griffin LY, eds. Prevention of Noncontact ACL Injuries. Rosemont, IL: 
American

a30 | february 2007 | volume 37 | number 2 | journal of orthopaedic & sports 
physical therapy



Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons; 2001.

2. Amis AA, Dawkins GP. Functional anatomy of the anterior cruciate ligament. 
Fibre
bundle actions related to ligament replacements and injuries. J Bone Joint Surg
Br. 1991;73:260-267.

3. Grood ES, Suntay WJ. A joint coordinate system for the clinical descrip-
tion of three-dimensional motions: application to the knee. J Biomech Eng.
1983;105:136-144.

4. Fung DT, Zhang LQ. Modeling of ACL impingement against the intercondylar 
notch.

Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon). 2003;18:933-941.

uLTRASTRuCTuRE, SIZE, AND MATERIAL PROPERTIES OF ThE huMAN
ANTERIOR CRuCIATE LIGAMENT: A SEX-BASED ASSESSMENT

Hashemi J, Chandrashekar N, Mansouri H, Hardy D, Slauter-
beck JR

Texas Tech University and Health Sciences Center, Lubbock, TX;
University of Vermont, Burlington, VT

INTRODuCTION: Despite intense focus and numerous research initiatives

over the past decade, the sex-based disparity in the rate of anterior cru-
ciate ligament (ACL) injuries has not diminished, as reported by Agel
et al (Agel et al, 2005). This recent report also indicates that, none of
the existing theories completely explains the disparity nor offers a so-
lution. Clearly, before a solution may be offered, the cause or causes for
the disparity should be identified; the authors propose that a root cause
(central factor) in conjunction with neuromuscular and hormonal the-
ories, feeds the existing sex-based disparity. This root cause is centered
around the differences in the geometry and properties of the ACL based
on sex. Several factors regarding sex differences in the performance of
the ACL have been recently reported: (i) female ACL is smaller than the
male ACL (Chandrashekar et al, 2005) even after adjustments made due
to body anthropometry; (ii) smaller ACLs are in fact weaker than larg-
er ACLs, when body anthropometric measurements are considered in
the analysis; (iii) if one considers male and female ACLs of essentially
the same size, in our recent study (Chandrashekar et al, in press), it was
shown that the female ACL has a lower mechanical quality (a measure of
mechanical properties) when compared to male ACL. What could be the
cause for this difference in properties? There is no evidence in the liter-
ature of a sex-based difference in the ultrastructural parameters of the
ACL. Any such difference could point to differences in the remodeling re-
sponse of the ACL. In this study, we hypothesize that female ACL has a
lower collagen fibril density, lower percentage of area occupied by fibrils
and lower mean diameter than male ACL after adjustments have been
made to age and donor anthropometry.

METhODS: Twelve ACL (6 male and 6 female) which were a subset of those

ACLs used for the study of mechanical properties, were randomly select-
ed to study the sex based differences in their ultrastructure. The ACLs
were dissected from fresh-frozen knees. The mean ages of male and fe-
male donors were 34.5 and 36.5 years, respectively. The anteromedial
and posterolateral bundles of the ACL were separated. Small pieces (3
mm in length and 1 mm in width and thickness) of the ACL from the
proximal, distal, and middle portions were removed from each bundle
and resulted in a minimum of 18 micrographs for each ACL. These mi-
crographs were then scanned using a negative scanner. The images were
analyzed using ImageJ software provided by NIH. The mean fibril di-
ameter, number of fibrils/square micron area and the percent cross-sec-
tional area occupied by fibrils were then calculated using all 18 micro-
graphs but omitting those regions of unusual absence of fibrils. These
ultrastructural parameters were compared between sexes using multi-
variate regression analysis considering the donor age and donor anthro-
pometry as covariates. The level of statistical significance (alpha) was set
to 0.05 a priori.

RESuLTS: There was no evidence of any sex based differences in the aver-
age fibril diameter and fibrils/square microns between sexes. We found
that male compare to female ACL has a higher percentage of collagen

fibrils occupying a defined cross-sectional area (male 45.2%, female
40.6%, P = .049).

DISCuSSION: Since collagen fibrils are primary load bearing members of

the ACL, higher collagen content can manifest itself in a tissue of high-
er mechanical quality. This is consistent with our earlier result showing
lower mechanical quality of the female ACL. The total number of fibrils
is generally associated with the stiffness of the ligaments. Accordingly,
higher number of collagen fibrils per square area relates with the mod-
ulus of elasticity of the ligament. Higher modulus of elasticity in male
ACLs (Chandrashekar et al, 2006) might not be due to higher fibril den-
sity in males.

CONCLuSION: Our findings regarding sex differences in size, properties,
and ultrastructure, collectively, offer a root cause in part describing the
existing disparity in ACL failure. This could explain how some of the dif-
ferences in neuromuscular response between athletes could have an im-
pact on the ACL failure rate. Female ACL has lower percentage collagen
content. This might be a reason for higher incidence of ACL injuries in
females. Such ultrastructural differences might show possible remodel-
ing differences between the sexes. A study with higher sample size can
provide more accurate results.

REFERENCES:

1. Agel J, Arendt EA, Bershadsky B. Anterior cruciate ligament injury in 
national col-
legiate athletic association basketball and soccer: a 13-year review. Am J 
Sports
Med. 2005;33:524-530.

2. Chandrashekar N, Slauterbeck J, Hashemi J. Sex-based differences in the an-
thropometric characteristics of the anterior cruciate ligament and its rela-
tion to intercondylar notch geometry: a cadaveric study. Am J Sports Med.
2005;33:1492-1498.

3. Chandrashekar N, Mansouri H, Slauterbeck J, Hashemi J. Sex-based differenc-
es in the tensile properties of the human anterior cruciate ligament. J Biomech.
2006;39:2943-2950.

ACuTE EFFECTS OF STEROID SEX hORMONES ON TYPE 1 COLLAGEN MRNA
EXPRESSION

Romani WA

University of Maryland School of Medicine, Dept. of Physical Therapy
and Rehabilitation Science

INTRODuCTION: Type 1 alpha-1 (T1C) and Type 3 collagen are crucial struc-

tural components within the extracellular matrix of the ACL and pro-
vide the tensile and elastic strength of the ligament. Estradiol (E2) has
been shown to reduce in vitro collagen proliferation and in-vivo load to
failure in the rabbit ACL, but studies on other animal models and on the
differences in ACL injury rate throughout a normal menstrual cycle have
been inconclusive. We have identified relationships between knee stiff-
ness and E2 concentrations near ovulation but no significant changes be-
tween menstrual cycle stages. To date, most of the attention on the role of
sex hormones and ACL injuries has focused on the female sex hormones,
E2 and progesterone. Since the male sex hormone, testosterone (T) plays
a key role in the aromatization of estrogen and collagen proliferation in
other connective tissues it is possible that T may also influence collagen
remodeling and the strength of the ACL. The purpose of this study was to
determine the acute influence of male and female steroid sex hormones
on  the expression of a key component of ligament strength, type 1 colla-
gen. We hypothesized that T1C mRNA expression would be lower in ani-
mals injected with E2 and higher in animals injected with T as compared
to gonadectomized controls.

METhODS: Two groups of male (n = 7, 7) and 2 groups of female (n = 6, 7)
12-week-old Sprague-Dawley rats were gonadectomized. After a 15 day
hormone clearance period the female rats were subcutaneously inject-
ed on 2 consecutive days at 8 am with 2.5 ug of E2 dissolved in 1 ml of
sesame oil or with sesame oil alone. Male rats were injected on the same
schedule with the sesame oil vehicle or 2 mg of dissolved Testosterone
Propionate. Rats were euthanized 6 hours after the second injection and

journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy | volume 37 | number 2 | 
february 2007 | a31



tissue was stored in RNAlater at –20°C until homogenized and isolat-
ed. Reverse transcriptase generation of cDNA was performed and qPCR
protocol to amplify T1C as per our lab’s protocol. Quantitative analysis
was carried out with an MJ SYBR green kit and an MJ Chromo 4 Real
Time Detector. Beta-Actin was used as an internal control. Differences
in mRNA expression were determined based on the relative difference
(or fold change) in cycle number (DCt) necessary to achieve the same
level of fluorescence as the reference control. Two separate paired t tests
were used to determine differences in mRNA expression between hor-
mone treated and control groups. Significance was set at P,.05
RESuLTS: As expected male rats treated with TP had higher mRNA ex-
pression than male controls (P = .025). Similarly, female rats treated
with TP had higher trends for mRNA expression than female controls
(P = .088).

DISCuSSION AND CONCLuSIONS: These results indicate that steroid sex hor-
mones acutely influenced the expression of T1C mRNA in gonadecto-
mized male and female rats. Although T1C likely plays a role in the ten-
sile strength of the ACL, changes in the expression of mRNA do not
necessarily indicate a change in protein content or strength of the ACL.
In  fact, studies in our and other laboratories have indicated that chang-
es in sex hormone concentrations do not acutely influence the strength
of the ACL. However, cyclic changes in hormone concentrations may ini-
tiate a process of collagen production or turnover that over a longer pe-
riod of time, may influence the strength of the ACL. Further studies are
needed to determine the long term influence of steroid sex hormones on
other markers for ligament strength and metabolism such as type 3 col-
lagen and matrix metalloproteinases.

ThE EFFECT OF SEX hORMONES ON ANTERIOR TIBIAL DISPLACEMENT
AND ANTERIOR TIBIAL ShEAR IN NORMAL OVuLATING WOMEN AND ORAL
CONTRACEPTIVE uSERS

Verscheure S, Osternig L, Drayer B, Fuller L

University of Oregon, Eugene, OR; Loyola Marymount, Los Angeles, CA;
National College of Naturopathic Medicine, Portland, OR

INTRODuCTION: The purpose of this study was to determine the effect of fluc-

tuating hormone levels on anterior tibial displacement (ATD) and anterior
tibial shear (ATS) in both ovulating women and oral contraceptive users.
METhODS: Eighteen uninjured, ovulating women (NORM) and 20 oral

contraceptive (OC) users participated. The NORM subjects were test-
ed for ATD, ATS, estrogen, and progesterone at 3 time periods during 1
complete menstrual cycle including: (1) the immediate onset of menses
(M1), (2) the estimated occurrence of estrogen peak (E), and (3) the im-
mediate onset of the next menses (M2). OC subjects were tested after in-
gesting estrogen supplements for 7 days (E), and when no supplement
was taken (M1, M2). ATD was produced by instrumented forces (KT-
2000) and ATS was recorded on a closed-chain dynamometer. Hormone
levels were assessed for each test time in the NORM group. ANOVAs
were used to identify significant differences in ATD and ATS (P,.05), if
any, between test periods, groups, and conditions. Post hoc analysis in-
cluded the identification of the predominant pattern of change of ATD
and ATS across test time for each group.

RESuLTS: No significant differences in ATD or ATS were found, howev-
er, the effect of test time on normalized ATD approached significance
(P,.08). The predominant pattern of ATD and ATS change across time
period in the NORM group (7 of 18 subjects) was an increase from M1 to
E and a decrease from E to M2. The predominant pattern of ATD (6 of
20 subjects) and ATS (9 of 20 subjects) change across test time observed
for the OC group was a decrease from M2 to E and an increase from E to
M2, the opposite of the NORM group.

DISCuSSION: Peak blood estrogen levels occurring during ovulation may be
linked to an increase in ATD and ATS in some ovulating women, and in-
gested synthetic hormones may be linked to a decrease in ATD and ATS
in some OC users. Changes in ATD may be due to a temporary effect
of estrogen or synthetic progestin on ACL tissue in some women, and
changes in ATS may be due to a transient effect of natural or synthetic
hormones on quadriceps activation in some women.

CONCLuSIONS: These data may indicate an effect of fluctuating hormone
levels on anterior tibial displacement (ATD) and anterior tibial shear
(ATS) in some ovulating women and oral contraceptive users, but these
results were only noted when the patterns of change in the dependent
variables (across time) for individual subjects were considered. Note:
Portions of these data have been presented at the following conferenc-
es: International Society of Biomechanics, Dunedin, New Zealand, July
2003; Northwest American College of Sports Medicine - Missoula, Mon-
tana, April 2003; Canadian Athletic Therapists’ Association, Victoria,
British Columbia, May 2003 and 2005.

a32 | february 2007 | volume 37 | number 2 | journal of orthopaedic & sports 
physical therapy

