CBC TELEVISION NEWS
HAS A BIAS PROBLEM
Conrad Winn

T

hough short of being universal,
there is a reasonably widespread view in government,
the universities, the press, and even in
private radio and television that CBC
Television News sets a Canadian standard for quality news production. An
extensive Southam News/COMPAS
national survey conducted in April,
2002 shows that the general public
tends to share this sanguine view of
the network’s news performance (see
www.compas.ca). Yet, alongside this
respect for the quality of CBC
Television News is pervasive evidence
of ideological division over the service.
I want to argue that Left-Right division over CBC news is unhealthy for
democracy, dangerous for the CBC, corrosive of Canadian national identity,
and harmful to the political Left. But,
first, consider some of the survey evidence that shows significant ideological
conflict over CBC Television News:
●
Self-described left-wingers are
about twice as likely as self-described
centrists to have watched CBC news
the night before the survey interview,
and half as likely to have watched
CTV/Global.
●
NDP voters were more than
twice as likely to have watched CBC
than Alliance voters and less than half
as likely to have watched CTV/Global
●
The overwhelming majority
of NDP voters familiar with the CBC
television show Counterspin consider it
objective as compared to a minority of
supporters of every other party.
Seventy-five per cent of self-described
left-wingers think it is objective, vs.
only nine per cent among selfdescribed right-wingers.
●
Thirty-four per cent of all
respondents agree that “The people

who run CBC Television News today
have an unfair access to millions of
taxpayer dollars so that they can promote their own personal political
opinions and agendas”—57 per cent
among Alliance voters vs. 25 per cent
among New Democrats.
●
Thirty-six per cent agree that
“CBC Television’s news bias today
leads to its giving far too much attention to street demonstrations and to
radicals hostile to international trade
and globalization and not enough to
objective experts”—52 per cent among
Alliance voters vs. only 27 per cent
among NDP supporters.
●
Thirty-six per cent agree that
Canada should “Gradually cut the subsidy and get CBC Television to seek
voluntary donations from viewers and
sponsors the way PBS does in the
U.S.”—57 per cent of Alliance voters
vs. 25 per cent NDP voters.
●
Sixty-six per cent of Alliance
voters want the CBC Television subsidy reduced or abolished, compared
to 20 per cent of New Democrats,
while 3 per cent of Alliance voters
want it increased compared to 27 per
cent of New Democrats.

O

ne does not need a survey to
make the case that enthusiasts
for CBC Television take comfort from
the evident quality of the network’s
news programs. The Southam/COMPAS survey lends credence to this thesis. Perceived news quality was a recurrent, volunteered opinion when
respondents were asked what they
thought of the network.
W hen Canadians do perceive a
national institution such as the CBC as
providing quality, this is not only
superb for the institution but it is also

potentially superb for the country. The
country as a whole benefits because
national pride and identity are greatly
reinforced by perceptions that
Canadian institutions deliver quality.
A generation ago, a research team
undertook a massive survey for the
then federal Department of Secretary
of State on the cultural and non-cultural institutions and activities that
engendered the most Canadian pride
and loyalty to the country. At the top
of the cultural list among Englishspeaking Canadians was the Royal
Ontario Museum. Though provincial
in mandate and provincial in funding,
the ROM nonetheless engendered
more pride in Canada than any other
arts and culture institution because it
was perceived as achieving the highest
level of quality. By this logic, the perceived quality of CBC Television News
can do much good for the country.
Yet, believing that CBC news quality is so good that evidence of bias can
be safely ignored may be perilous. The
evident ideological bias of the network’s television news department risks
eating away at the credibility of the network’s news, undermining both the
mother institution and popular good
feeling about the country that the news
department is intended to serve.
The Canadian Left and Right today
agree on some of the biggest issues of
governance—priority for health spending and personal income tax cuts. Yet
they are divided, even sharply so, in
their attitudes towards CBC Television
News. The societal cohesion essential
for Canadian democracy to flourish is
undermined to the extent that the
Right feels that it has reason to be mistrustful of CBC news. Healthy democracies need a climate of trust so that
POLICY OPTIONS
JULY-AUGUST 2002

47

Conrad Winn
when Left and Right exchange seats in
Parliament the public policy consequences are not disruptive. By this
logic, healthy democracies require
cyclical changes of Parliamentary personnel as a guarantee against abuse of
power, together with some degree of
consensus on major public policy
issues in order to assure an optimum
level of economic and social stability.
This phenomenon of Left-Right consensus and trust is at the root of the
success of democracy as pioneered in
the Anglo-American world.

A

vital factor in the flourishing of
democracy has been the AngloAmerican and especially the American
invention of journalism. As Jean
Chalaby and other scholars of journalism have shown, throughout the 19th
century American and British papers
routinely printed more pages, carried
more hard news, and reported more
fact than their European counterparts.
The British and American newspapers
jointly invented the idea of the foreign
correspondent and the news service;
the American press invented the previously unheard-of ideas of the reporter
and the interview.
The journalism of the successful,
stable democracies of the AngloAmerican world is never uniquely
intelligent or well written. It is not
superior in language or ideas. AngloAmerican journalism is distinguished
by being a little less partisan, more factual, less contrived to make a point,
more pragmatic, less dogmatic.
The Anglo-American press almost
never employed great writers. The
most famous exception, Charles
Dickens, resigned his job as editor after
three weeks, describing his experience
as an “error.” By contrast, the continental tradition, especially the French
tradition, was to employ great writers
and poets, who saw their journalistic
mission as one of advocacy and ideological interpretation rather than
reporting.
Europeans were long resistant to
the idea of the Anglo-American invention of an objective, news-oriented

48

OPTIONS POLITIQUES
JUILLET-AOÛT 2002

journalism that sought to separate fact
from opinion. An 1836 French definition of a reporter said that this was
“the type of English journalist, a sort
of clerk who regards it as his duty to
take note of events’ proceedings.”
The Anglo-American model of
objective journalism flourished in part
because democracy took off in the
English-speaking world, thereby allowing an independent, fact-oriented
journalism to flourish, and also
because this new journalism enhanced
and reinforced these democratic developments. British journalists began to
report on Parliament in the late 18th
century, almost a century before
France began to lift its strict, legal prohibitions against the unauthorized
reporting of legislative debates. By the
mid-19th century, the British press was
throwing off the shackles of extensive
government bribery. Successfully funded by ad revenue and no longer by
covert government payments, the
Times began to speak out on the special responsibility of the Fourth Estate
to be independent of government.
Across the channel, the French government carried on a mammoth program of media bribes until the First
World War.
Until the outbreak of the Second
World War, it is well documented,
Parisian newspapers and the Havas
news agency continued to accept sizeable bribes from various foreign governments on whose behalf they twisted the news. For decades after the war,
French Presidents controlled the electronic media thanks to their ability to
hire and fire newscasters on the government television network and to
affect the content of the nominally
private broadcasters operating from
Luxembourg and Monaco that were
owned by the nationalized banks.
The Canadian public is firmly
ensconced in the Anglo-American tradition of democracy. We see pervasive
evidence of this in the public’s low tolerance for ethics violations in government, in its pervasive enthusiasm for
democratic ideas and practices, and its
discomfort with foreign policies that

entail relationships with despotic and
abusive regimes.
The evidence from the survey
research conducted by COMPAS for
Southam News suggests that the CBC
is not firmly entrenched in this same
tradition. Rather than being a relatively unemotional, non-partisan conveyor of information on policy issues that
arouse controversy, CBC news itself
arouses controversy. It is perceived to
behave at least partly in the continental tradition of a journalisme engagé, as
evidenced by the data showing how it
divides the public along ideological
lines.
Left-right division over CBC television news is dangerous for the CBC
because the ideological impact of CBC
news puts the network outside the
mainstream of Anglo-American journalism and society. CBC’s conduct is
dangerous because it risks jeopardizing
the perceived quality of the news service, which is the last remaining pillar
on which public financial support for
the corporation rests. The public doesn’t particularly value CBC entertainment
programming,
and
few
Canadians think national unity would
be threatened if CBC Television were
diminished.
Left-Right division over CBC news
is unconstructive for Canada because
such division puts the network’s news
service at risk. When the private networks are able to deliver higher quality news, the fate of CBC News might
no longer matter. But until then…
Finally, and paradoxically, LeftRight division over CBC news harms
the parliamentary Left. Ambitious
young people, seeing the frustrations
of the Left in parliamentary elections,
may notice the special enthusiasm of
the Left for CBC news and guess where
their talents might be more welcome.
The parliamentary Left is also harmed
if it take its electoral cues from its
friends in the news instead of from real
voters.
Conrad Winn is President of COMPAS
Inc. and author of several books on the
media.

