Chapter 5

How Journalists Portray
Political Leaders:
The Personalization of
Prime Ministers and
the Connection to Party
Affiliation in Swedish
News Coverage
Eva-Karin Olsson, Professor, Department of Security, Strategy and
­Leadership (ISSL), Swedish National Defence University, Sweden
Journalists not only represent political leaders in terms of their policies and political
competence. The personalities and private lives of leaders have also become an
important component in mediated stories and narratives crucial for voter identification and interest. This chapter explores how the Swedish press reports on prime
ministers’ social backgrounds, personal appearance and leadership characteristics
in relation to party affiliation. The empirical material consists of news reporting on
four former Swedish prime ministers: two from the Swedish Social Democratic
Party; and two from the Moderate Party. The findings show that it is not only party
affiliation that is of interest to journalists in reporting on prime ministers. Broader
societal trends of what it means to be a politician in a certain time and era also
influence reporting.
Keywords: personalization, political journalism, Sweden, narrative, personalities

99

c h a p t er 5

Introduction
The personalization of politics has been widely discussed in recent years,
both in academic literature as well as in the public debate. Politicians are not
only understood in connection with the policies they make and their political
competence, but also through their personal characteristics and lives. The
personalities of politicians have become a key part of mediated stories and
narratives crucial for voter identification, emotional connection and interest
(Alexander, 2011; Langer, 2010; Stanyer, 2013). Political leaders also apply
personalization strategies themselves, creating an appealing image based on
attractive personal traits and characteristics in order to seize media attention
and market their policies (Campus, 2010; Helms, 2012). Personalization has
been further triggered by social media, which allow politicians to bypass
journalists and to communicate directly with the public, and in so doing
more freely create the desired image. The newly elected American president,
Donald Trump, is the obvious example. Not only leaders but also political
parties can be understood as brands providing recognition and cohesion for
voters through their policies, history and ideology. Therefore, the increasing
focus on political leaders as individuals not only means that they act more
often as spokespersons for their respective parties, but also that they embody
the party brand through their personal life and personality. Parties and leaders thus engage in a constant interaction of positive, or negative,
reinforcement.
The personalization of politics is closely intertwined with the notion of
media logic and its focus on dramatization, conflict, and a tendency to
avoid com­plexity in highlighting political actions and leaders (Altheide &
Snow, 1979; Mazzoleni & Schultz, 1999). In addition, the ideal of subjectivity in journalism, as a way for journalists to create a sense of identification and explain complex reality, contributes to the personalization of
political actors (Steensen, this book). Personalization has contributed to
make journalistic products out of anonymous and complicated policy
processes, where politicians draw upon their private sphere as an asset in
manufacturing their political identity (Smith, 2016). Corner (2000) uses
the concept of mediated persona in stressing that political identity is
always constructed and negotiated in relation to societal values: “The projection of an optimal political self will often require careful attention to

100

h ow j o u r n a l i s t s p o r t r ay p o l i t i c a l l e a d er s

popular values in light of the range of possible projections, which any
given politician has available to them” (p. 394). Advantages and disadvantages in this process can be age, gender, ethnicity, appearance, class or
other time specific qualities.
In Sweden, the change towards a more media oriented political scene
started in 1976 when the Swedish Social Democratic Party (SAP) lost the
election after 40 years in power (Premfors and Sundström, 2007). For
example, SAP prime ministers Ingvar Carlsson and Göran Persson put an
increasing emphasis on media experience when recruiting ministers and
other political staff as compared to their precursors (Sundström, 2009,
p. 154). This trend has coincided with journalism becoming more investigative and independent, which amongst other things has contributed to
blurring the distinctions between public and private (Petersson et al.,
2006). The role of PR and news management was for example crucial
for rebranding the Swedish conservative party, the Moderate Party. The
rebranding started with Fredrik Reinfeldt taking over the role of leader in
2003. The transformation of the party involved the acceptance of parts of
the traditional Social Democratic welfare state. This was, for example,
manifested in the party borrowing rhetoric from the SAP by emphasizing
the importance of labor, something that was clearly articulated when the
Moderate Party called itself a party for working people (Ekengren &
Oscarsson, 2015).
This study explores how four Swedish prime ministers were portrayed in
four leading newspapers, and how personal characteristics were described as
embodying values and norms belonging to their respective political parties.
This will be done by focusing on social background, personal appearance, and
leadership characteristics, identified as important categories in previous research. Two of the chosen prime ministers are from the SAP (Göran Persson and
Ingvar Carlsson) and two from the Moderate Party (Carl Bildt and Fredrik
Reinfeldt).

Previous research
The personalization of political leaders can be ascribed to general trends in
contemporary society such as the decline in party identification and political
ideology as well as the rise of celebrity culture and identity politics. In such an
101

c h a p t er 5

environment, the personal becomes a fruitful way to attract voters who are not
interested in formal politics. At the same time, the personalization of politics
can be a double-edged sword. For example, Foley (2008) argues that the increased focus on political leaders may contribute to a leadership decline since the
attention given to leaders distances them from their party base. Moreover, the
personalization of politics creates a situation in which politics is embodied
within leaders and as such becomes a source of direct competition between
political parties. This embodiment tends to fuse policy initiatives with leaders’
personal characteristics, making it difficult to differentiate between critics of
policies and the leaders themselves.
The notion of personalization has been widely discussed in the literature
from various perspectives. For example, Langer (2006, p. 23) makes a distinction between presidentialization and personality politics. Presidentialization
refers to individual politicians’ exposure at the expense of political parties,
whereas personality politics focuses on leaders’ personalities in political discourse involving aspects such as family, competence, personal appearance, personal qualities, and upbringing (Langer, 2007). Regarding presidentialization,
Oegema and Kleinnijenhuis (2000), in their study on the coverage of political
leaders in Dutch media, show that although political leaders play an important
role, political parties still dominate news coverage. Similarly, Reinemann and
Wilke (2001, 2007) found no evidence of an increased individualization in
German news, stating that the news media’s focus on the Chancellor has always
been high. Based on a comparative study on media coverage of election campaigns in six European countries (Austria, France, Germany, the Netherlands,
Switzerland, and the United Kingdom), Kriesi (2011) did not discover an
increased focus on individual leaders, the Netherlands being the exception.
Also studies made by Karvonen (2010) and Adam & Maier (2010) confirm this
picture. Based on a comparative study on the personalization of politics in
Germany and the UK, Holtz-Bacha et al. (2014) show that references to political or professional qualities outnumbered personal references in recent general elections. At the same time, personal life and personal qualities played a
bigger role in the UK than in the German coverage.
Other studies find an increase in personalization. Langer (2007) demonstrates in her study on British prime ministers that political leaders have become
more visible in news coverage in the twenty-year period she studied. Moreover,
references to personality have shifted from foremost leadership qualities to
102

h ow j o u r n a l i s t s p o r t r ay p o l i t i c a l l e a d er s

aspects related to leaders’ personal lives. A key period was the Blair Era, which
altered expectations regarding the exposure of private persons in public discourse (Langer, 2010). At the same time, leaders differ in their will and talent to
make strategic use of personal qualities and personal life in public (ibid.). For
example, Tony Blair’s personality was used to strengthen the image of the
Labour Party, whereas Gordon Brown assumed a more private role. David
Cameron had a similar ambition to Blair when he started off as leader for the
Conservative Party. He acknowledged the party’s image problem in representing the rich and privileged few, and its need for change. In order to come off
as an ordinary modern man, Cameron was reported cycling to work, wearing
designer sneakers, and using fair-trade products (Smith, 2008). David
Cameron shows similarities to Blair in emphasizing the link between the
family life orientation in his private life and his launching of various family
and environmental policies as a way of “authenticating his political positions”
(ibid., p. 67).
Moreover, the personalization of politics is closely connected to the notion of
celebrity politics. From a feminist perspective Van Zoonen (2006) argues that
celebrity politics works against female politicians who are not, compared to their
male counterparts, able to benefit from the opportunity provided to fuse the
personal, political and popular into an attractive political image due to the inherent polarization of femininity and politics. According to Smith (2016) the early
1990s saw a new type of masculinity, which embraced traditional feminist
domestic attributes with a special emphasis on fatherhood. During this period,
the “new man” category appeared, where political leaders were keen to appear
“like ordinary people” with an active family life, friends and other interests beyond politics (p. 103). This was also a point in time when the personalization of
politicians and celebrity culture in general made an upswing. “Personalization,
celebrity and fatherhood all come together in British politics, most notably in the
persona of Tony Blair” (ibid., p. 103). The trend continued with the American
President Obama. One component of the new type of politician was the ability
to relate to voters by being one of them. This strategy involves the delicate balance
of being an ordinary “one-of-us” person while at the same time someone extraordinary, in an age that promotes egalitarian values yet expects unusual leadership qualities and competence (Smith, 2009).
In a Swedish context, there has been limited research on the subject.
Johansson (2008) conducted a study on the prominence of Swedish party
103

c h a p t er 5

leaders in election campaigns. The study showed a weak trend of increased
personalization in tabloids but not in broadsheets. Bjerling (2012) demonstrates that the amount of personal characteristics mentioned in Swedish news
coverage increased between 1979 and 1988, but after that remained the same.
For example, references to family increased dramatically throughout the years
studied, whereas references to physical appearances decreased. News reporting related to personality characteristics, competence, conviction and morals
increased over this time period (p. 179-180). This study aims to increase knowledge on the personalization of politics and in particular in connection with
party identification in a Swedish context.

Material and Method
The empirical material consisted of news, opinion and feature articles from the
four major newspapers in Sweden: two tabloids (Aftonbladet and Expressen);
and two daily morning newspapers (Dagens Nyheter and Svenska Dagbladet).
The following prime ministers and mandate periods were included in the analysis: Ingvar Carlsson, SAP, 1994–1996; Göran Persson, SAP, 1996–1998; Carl
Bildt, Moderate Party, 1991–1994; and Fredrik Reinfeldt, Moderate Party,
2006–2010.
The prime ministers were selected based on party affiliation. Time periods
were chosen so as to incorporate their first time in office except for Ingvar
Carlsson, where the empirics cover his last period. As a result, part of the
coverage is focused on summing up Carlsson’s political career, which may
make journalists less inclined to attribute negative characteristics. The selection of his last period was due to the fact that he entered office by replacing
Olof Palme who was assassinated in 1986. In light of this fact, his first period
was quite special compared to the other prime ministers. Beyond that, for
practical reasons it was also difficult to use his first period in office since the
digital database I used first started keeping an archive of articles from these
newspapers in 1995.
In collecting the articles, I used the database Mediearkivet which is owned by
Retriever. The search was made based on the name of each of the respective
prime ministers during the selected mandate periods. The first 64 search pages of
links to articles, based on relevance, were selected for analysis. The material was
thereafter categorized and analyzed based on information related to upbringing,
104

h ow j o u r n a l i s t s p o r t r ay p o l i t i c a l l e a d er s

appearance and leadership characteristics. The analysis is based on the entire text
corpus related to these three aspects, but the presentation highlights the most
commonly identified characteristics. The analysis focuses on the descriptions
and judgements provided by the journalists; that is, not the statements given by
the prime ministers themselves or by other actors such as other politicians,
experts or opinion polls. This is the case since I am interested in the journalists’
descriptions of political leaders and their subjective notions. The number of articles in the analysis includes the following: Bildt, 168 articles; Reinfeldt, 132;
Carlsson, 72; and Persson, 130. One shortcoming is that the material collected
for Carl Bildt did not include Aftonbladet and Svenska Dagbladet, and as a result
the empirical material for him is dominated by Expressen.

Analysis
Upbringing
SAP
Ingvar Carlsson is described as having a traditional Social Democratic upbringing. His father was a warehouse worker and his mother a cleaner and seamstress. When Ingvar was 12 his father died, and he had to contribute to the family
economy by taking various part-time jobs. After finishing compulsory education, he pursued a master’s degree in politics and economics at Lund University,
where he also became chairman of the SAP student club and met Prime Minister
Tage Erlander. Carlsson’s career kicked off when Erlander asked him if he wanted to come to Stockholm to work as his political secretary. Ingvar Carlsson’s
journey towards becoming prime minister is often summarized in headlines like
“From a Wooden Shanty in Borås to the Sager Palace,” in this case followed by an
ingress saying that “It has never escaped Ingvar that he belongs to the working
class. Deep down he hates the upper class, instinctively and morally” (Expressen,
19 August 1995). Carlsson’s journey can be understood as not only a personal
journey, but also as a symbol for the Social Democratic Party making anything
possible, and where background no longer determines people’s destiny. As summarized in the following quote:
Ingvar Carlsson personifies, both through his background and his work, the Social
Democratic dream. He started off with a poor upbringing and significant social
hardships but succeeded in becoming a diligent student, a member of the Swedish

105

c h a p t er 5

Parliament and the leader of the Swedish Social Democratic Youth League. He also
assumed several arduous political assignments and ministerial posts and later became
party leader and finally Prime Minister (Aftonbladet, 8 October 1995).

Compared to Carlsson, there are few mentions of Göran Persson’s social
background in the empirical material. In one article, we get to know that his
father was a construction worker, who was occasionally unemployed. One
specific story, which according to the journalists was often told by Persson
himself, is that his father could not afford to visit the dentist and as a result had
to have his teeth extracted (Aftonbladet, 30 May 1998). Within the SAP there
is a long standing tradition of the party leadership role being narrated through
personal experiences of social injustice, in order to emphasize a working class
background (Pauli, 2012). In telling the story of his father, Persson could
demonstrate that he shared party members’ backgrounds and ideals, something
that made him a legitimate representative for the working class. However, this
class narrative never really takes off and Persson’s personality receives more
journalistic attention than his family background. For example, we get to
know that he did his military service at the lowest possible rank, and that military officers and friends remember Persson as “the man with the enormous
body” (Expressen, 30 March 1996). Furthermore, Persson is portrayed as a
person who is not afraid of authorities. For instance, Persson called the
Minister of Defense himself, explaining his legal rights, when military superiors did not give him permission to attend political meetings (ibid). Persson’s
background is not described as embodying the Social Democratic Party in the
same way as Carlsson’s, even though journalists, if they wanted to, could have
created such a narrative based upon his upbringing and social class. Thus,
journalistic descriptions of political leaders are not automatically based on
party affiliation, but may well be based on other frames of references and
interests.

The Moderate Party
In the coverage of Carl Bildt’s upbringing and background there are numerous
references to his aristocratic background, such as accounts of family reunions
at the aristocratic Nobility House in Stockholm. We also learn that Bildt was
not the first in his family to become prime minister, since his great, great
grandfather held the office between 1888-89 (Expressen, 24 May 1993). In this
106

h ow j o u r n a l i s t s p o r t r ay p o l i t i c a l l e a d er s

way, Bildt fits nicely into the stereotypical description of the conservative party
as a party for the privileged and rich. In regard to his early years and his personality, he is in general described as being something of a nerd:
The good little boy already from the outset. A guy who drew fire trucks and fighter
planes during lessons. […] His father was a major, his mother a housewife. Calle1
himself was a boy sitting with his nose in American aviation magazines (Expressen,
16 September 1991).

Another article about his upbringing states that: “There was not much glue
sniffing and smoking” (Expressen, 14 November 1993). Beyond the nerd
image, he is also at times depicted has having an arrogant personality, such as
in the article with the headline “Carl Casts His Shadow over Others” (Expressen,
19 April 1992). Compared to the practice of scholars emphasizing the “ordinariness” of political leaders, Bildt is interesting since descriptions of his background, interests and personality stress the opposite.
The media image of Reinfeldt differs from Bildt in some key aspects. Similar
to Persson, there is limited information on Reinfeld’s early years and social
background. One of the few remarks is about how his mother was “absolutely
convinced” that her son would become prime minister one day, since he had
always been structured and well-organized (Expressen, 18 September 2006).
The reasons for the lack of class related information, compared to Carlsson and
Bildt, is of course difficult to know. It could well be that class was no longer
discussed in society in the same way that it had been, or that Reinfeldt has a
less stereotypical and therefore, from a journalistic perspective, less interesting
background. The only references to social background are made by Reinfeldt
himself, complaining that the Moderate Party is perceived as a party for rich
people:
And he adds that despite the fact that he carried out one of the biggest transformations
of a Swedish political party ever, that work has still not managed to make up for decades
of stereotypical images of Moderates as rich men’s kids. […] “ I myself have felt that
sometimes. I have a simple background, with parents who had no higher education
degrees when they met. I have lived in simple apartments and townhouses. Nevertheless,
the stereotype is ascribed to me as well. Anders Borg and Sven Otto Littorin have

1

A common Swedish nickname for a boy named Carl.

107

c h a p t er 5

similar backgrounds to me, and we have all noticed that people did not want to accept
us as common people. That weighs us down” (Dagens Nyheter, 14 June 2010).

As can be seen, Reinfeldt emphasizes that he and his fellow colleagues are
ordinary people, and in doing so he distances himself from the traditional
image of the party, personalized by Bildt’s aristocratic and privileged background. This should also be understood in light of Reinfeldt’s project of rebranding the party into the “New Moderates”, aimed at attracting working and
middle class voters. Similarities can here be drawn to David Cameron’s ambition to modernize the Conservative Party and to shed its right-wing image by
utilizing his private life as a way of becoming more authentic and thus modifying the party brand (Langer, 2010, p. 67).

Personal appearance
SAP
In the empirical material, there are few references to Ingvar Carlsson’s appearance, except for one where his face is drawn in the shape of a foot. Several
humorous references are made to this. In contrast, Göran Persson’s appearance
is often mentioned, and in a negative way:
Göran Persson looks like a prime minister from the old days, and that is one of his
problems: His image is wrong, out of tune with the subtle signals of what is socially
correct in our time. They who socially set the agenda today are slim and fit, and
yesterday’s workers who are round and pudgy are stigmatized (Aftonbladet, 22 March
1997).

Persson’s appearance here becomes one explanation for his inability to
attract voters. Moreover, the frequent remarks about Persson being overweight
can be understood in relation to class. Obesity is often connected to descriptions of working class people and their lack of self-control (Olivia, 2014;
Skeggs 2004, pp. 99–105). Persson’s appearance is also linked to actual political
decisions and to the negative caricature of Social Democrats as old-fashioned
and pompous.
This bodily continuity is, I think, one of the reasons why Persson manages to pursue
a political agenda that at the time was unthinkable to a large majority of the people

108

h ow j o u r n a l i s t s p o r t r ay p o l i t i c a l l e a d er s

[…]. Only a real “Sosse”2 can make the great system shift. Göran Persson is the real
“Sosse” embodied. Visually, I mean. He looks exactly the way I always pictured a
Social Democratic municipal politician would. […] No matter how much he speaks
of budget cut downs and misery, when one sees Göran Persson one starts to think of
the authoritative gavel and firm handshake, and newly built residential areas, largescale road projects and increased pensions (Expressen, 10 April 1995).

That Persson is as outdated and not in touch with his time resonates with
a study by Langer (2007) on British prime ministers, which showed that
­journalists s­ howed much more positive interest in the appearance of Blair and
Cameron than Major and Brown, where the first two were described as modern
and trendy and the latter as outdated “last century” styles (p. 66). Even
more interesting is how descriptions of Persson’s appearance work as a way of
understanding both his personal characteristics and political actions.

The Moderate Party
Both Bildt and Reinfeldt are portrayed as young-looking and well dressed. The
news article below describes a meeting between Bildt and a group of younger
people on a TV show.
Carl Bildt, 44 in July, works between 80 and 100 hours a week, traveling as a big shot
around Sweden and the world, making speeches, giving interviews, trying to hold the
government together, battling the galloping budget deficit and growing unemployment.
Yet he looks like a confirmation candidate. This became particularly evident yesterday
when he went up against ten young people on Channel 1. There was no visible difference
[in their appearances], but the guy in glasses rules the country3 (Expressen, 17 May 1993).

In general, there are few connections made between the appearance of Bildt
and his political work, in contrast to Persson.
When it comes to Reinfeldt, the journalists describe how he goes to the gym
on a regular basis and that he lost 14 kilos before the election campaign. Also
Reinfeldt’s clothes are discussed, for example, in relation to how statesmanlike
they make him look: “It was Fredrik Reinfeldt’s fifth summer speech as party
leader. […] yesterday he wore a new gray suit to emphasize that he is Prime
2
3

The Swedish nickname given to members of the Social Democratic Party.
Referring to Carl Bildt.

109

c h a p t er 5

Minister and statesman” (Aftonbladet, 10 August 2008). There are few negative
remarks regarding his clothing. The only time Reinfeldt is criticized is when he
and his wife dress too casually during a state visit in China (Aftonbladet, 14
April 2008). It can also be noted that the Moderates, as part of their re-branding, recommended party members to wear causal clothing, which meant
“leave the tie and the pearl necklace at home” (c.f. Gustafsson, 2013).

Leadership characteristics
SAP
The descriptions of Carlsson as a person are fairly consistent. He is in general
portrayed as “a stubborn working ant with a strong sense of duty, meticulous,
Lutheran and professional” (Expressen, 19 August 1995), all characteristics of
the traditional working class ethos. Another frequently repeated story, which
ties neatly into the Social Democratic tradition, is that he never aspired to
become prime minister. Rather, he took the assignment out of duty and loyalty
to the party when Olof Palme was assassinated in 1986. He never adjusted to
being constantly monitored by the media and his political opponents, and was
happy to resign and “finally be free” to do whatever he wanted (Aftonbladet, 19
August 1995). Carlsson is seen as an ordinary man who wanted nothing more
than to lead an ordinary life. This narrative fits nicely into a working class tradition in which anti-pretentiousness has been central and where party leadership is seen as impersonal, that is, no one is indispensable (Skeggs, 2011, p. 11;
Gaffney and Lahel, 2013, p. 498).
Another often referred to characteristic of Carlsson is his high sense of
morals. Again, the story fits nicely into the Social Democratic movement
where enriching oneself is one of the worst things a leader can do, and where
any sign of such behavior inevitably leads to a loss of confidence and eventually an end to one’s political career (Barrling Hermansson, 2004). During the
time period studied, Carlsson’s morality was tested in one of the most remembered political scandals in Sweden. His “crown princess” Mona Sahlin got
caught using a government credit card, and the scandal put an end to her chances of succeeding Carlsson. Instead of being associated with Sahlin and her
lack of morality, the scandal seemed to strengthen the image of Carlsson as a
man of strong morals. In the coverage, he is described as torn between two
principles: his moral standards when it comes to the use of taxpayers’ money
110

h ow j o u r n a l i s t s p o r t r ay p o l i t i c a l l e a d er s

and the loyalty that comes with friendship. “Ingvar Carlsson is burning with
eagerness to save a friend and a close co-worker. But he cannot hide his strong
morals […] ‘One shall not use a business card [for personal purchases]’”
(Expressen, 19 October 1995). This means that Carlsson “will fight like a tiger
for Mona Sahlin” in various situations “but not when he thinks that she has
acted incorrectly” (Expressen, 23 October 1995). Carlsson is portrayed as the
opposite of Sahlin, “A man who rather takes the bus than a rental car, and pays
for his beers at the hotel with crumpled banknotes rather than using plastic
cards” (ibid.). Not only Sahlin, but also other SAP politicians at the local level
have been indicted for tax evasion. Again, Carlsson is portrayed as their opposite and as “the last prime minister from the old days […]. An honest statesman who pays with his own money for taxis when on business trips, and who
took a five hour bus trip home after his final party meeting rather than ordering champagne and the government plane” (Expressen, 9 March 1996). In this
way, Carlsson’s high moral standard is not only ascribed to him as a person, but
to a traditional Social Democratic type of ideal leader, driven by loyalty to
society and party and subordinating him/herself to the collective (Barrling
Hermansson, 2004; Madestam, 2009). The descriptions of Carlsson’s character
work as a way to strengthen the image of the traditional Social Democratic
Party, and at the same time show that the party and its representatives are
changing.
Turning to Persson, the image of him is more negative. His personality and
leadership style attract considerable media attention. At times, Persson is
directly compared to Carlsson. For example, journalists report that Carlsson
used the pronoun “we” when talking about the government, whereas Göran
Persson says “I think,” “I have decided,” and “my government” (Svenska
Dagbladet, 28 June 1996). Another story describing the difference between the
two prime ministers is highlighted by the obligatory photo sessions in connection to EU summits; Persson is said to “always place himself in the center of the
picture, whereas Carlsson was on the end” (Aftonbladet, 23 June, 1996). They
also differ in terms of morals. For example, Persson is often interrogated about
his travelling both for and outside of work (Expressen, 25 November 1997;
Aftonbladet, 16 December 1997), and is also portrayed as stingy. For example,
as a child he was constantly looking for bottles to recycle as a way of making
money, which earned him the nickname “the bottle” (Expressen, 2 September
1994). In more recent stories, Persson is often seen stealing candy at a shop
111

c h a p t er 5

near the parliament, and he often claims to have no cash as a way of forcing
co-workers to pay for his coffee and cakes (Expressen, 8 April 1996).
The most recurrent theme of Persson is his “bossiness”. In the article “Blunt
Persson”, he is said to “cause discontent and uncertainty” among the people
around him (Svenska Dagbladet, 1 February 1998). Apparently, Persson’s
nickname is “HSB” (“He Who Decides” translated from Swedish), which
according to sources dates back to his time as a local politician in Katrineholm
(Expressen, 2 September 1994). Yet on the flipside of being accused of being
bossy is the fact that he makes things happen. However, this negative coverage
of him dominates the news, and even the journalists themselves comment on
it. One journalist summarizes the news coverage of Persson while he is still
Prime Minister:
A person who does not think, does not read books, is educated in “Katrineholmpolitics”, provincial, a loser, one who feels sorry for himself when being criticized and
who gets bored at EU meetings. It seems like Persson can only be described through
clichés. This is probably due to the fact that he personifies all of the old traditional
prejudices about Social Democratic leaders – uneducated, authoritarian and pompous – who are at best capable of ruling their municipalities, but who are not capable
of behaving themselves in more sophisticated settings (Aftonbladet, 20 January 1997).

Persson’s media image is also interesting compared to political leader ideals
stating that politicians should be loving, easy going and friendly, embodied by
politicians such as Tony Blair (Smith, 2016). Persson’s alleged bossiness resonates badly with this image. He is also described as having problems with
female voters and party members (Expressen, 15 December 1997).4 “Women
did not like him. One female party member said that he could make remarks
such as ‘I think that you have gained weight, sweetie’” (Expressen, 6 September
1998). His inability to attract female voters was seen as problematic within the
SAP. Persson tried to change this image but failed. According to one journalist,
Persson “hugs voters and is calm and thoughtful in front of the cameras and
microphones. But then he forgets […] and is captured on the spot as the selfcentered male decision maker”. This reporter also describes how leading female
Social Democrats were “crushed by Persson’s leadership”, describing Persson as
4

112

It should however be noted that Persson, as did Carlsson, stuck to the strategy “every other seat for a
woman” when appointing ministers (Sundström, 2009, p. 154).

h ow j o u r n a l i s t s p o r t r ay p o l i t i c a l l e a d er s

a man who is “unable to control his instincts, which makes him just take the
lead and push others to the side’’ (Expressen, 10 September 1998). In response
to the negative media coverage, PR strategists were called in to work hard on
building a more attractive image of Persson. “It is the reasoning and listening
Persson the Swedish people should see, preferably women” (Dagens Nyheter,
20 March 1996).
Some articles describe Göran Persson’s merits in the EU and other international settings. One recurrent story is that Persson finds EU meetings boring
and as a result is not very engaged. Often he comes off as “uncertain” compared
to when he was Minister of Finance and knew “everything” (Expressen, 12
January 1997). Yet, descriptions of Persson on the international scene are not
only gloomy. For example, when Persson visited Merrill Lynch (the world’s
biggest investment firm) in the capacity of Minister of Finance, he said he was
mocked for Sweden’s poor finances by “grinning financial puppies”. Yet, after
his contributions to reforming the Swedish economy, he is praised for his selfconfidence and political skills (Expressen, 4 November 1997). It can be noted
that his media image became more positive during his second term of office,
something that can at least partly be explained by Persson’s skillful management of the Swedish EU presidency, but also by his increasing ability to handle
the media (Sundström, 2009, p. 165). Also worth noting is that the leadership
ideals characterizing the SAP have traditionally been two-fold: authoritarian;
and democratic. An authoritarian style is needed in order to avoid internal
conflict and keep the party together, whereas the more democratic, listening
ideal is a way of connecting with the members. Over time, these ideals have
been challenged. Persson continued to apply both. Even though he was heavily
criticized for his authoritarian leadership, he managed to keep internal party
conflicts at bay. According to Pauli (2012), questioning the traditional ideals
within the SAP did not result in any clear ideas on what to replace them with.
Instead, more weight was given to the leader’s personality and how it matched
the party’s needs. One explanation for the critical media coverage may well be
that a lack of clear ideals, and the subsequent emphasis on personality, unleashed criticism both from the party itself and from journalists. In comparing
the two SAP leaders, Persson can be understood as the flipside of Carlsson,
who is portrayed through a positive traditional Social Democratic ideal of
being modest, moral and loyal. In Persson’s case, the journalists rather play on
the negative connotations of Social Democratic Party leaders as uneducated,
113

c h a p t er 5

authoritarian and pompous. In any case, both images build upon traditional
stereotypical ways of understanding the party and its leaders.

The Moderate Party
Carl Bildt is described as a fact-seeking politician who knows policy issues in
miniscule detail. He is portrayed as interested in history, technology and foreign policy but uninformed about sports and popular culture. Moreover, he is
regarded as “always busy”.
Visits, telephone calls, letters, meetings, trips, lunch with the government at noon, a
press conference, a foreign newspaper that would like to ask some questions,
speeches, opinion articles, Helmut Kohl calls and wants to talk for a while. “Carl cannot keep this pace forever. No one can,” says one of his collaborators in confidence
(Expressen, 3 January 1992).

Bildt is also described as bad at connecting with people, which makes him
come off as cold (Expressen, 7 December 1993). He is portrayed as self-confident to the extent that he lacks compassion and regret, a typical “qualified
technocrat” (Expressen, 7 September 1994). News reports also stress that he is
self-aware and has a sense of “untouchability, derived from his upper class
inherited arrogance and verbal, witty elegance” (Dagens Nyheter, 6 September
1994). On the EU, and the international, scene he is described as successful,
and he apparently really enjoys it, as reported during a visit in Germany: “Carl
Bildt is happy. He is out in the big wide world, away from the little Swedish
pond” (Expressen, 23 June 1993). In another account from an EU setting, one
journalist describes how he experiences “150 journalists listening impressed to
the self-confident Swedish guy in the spotlight. He speaks perfect English without a script. Quickly and without hesitation, he answers all the questions”
(Expressen, 23 October 1991). In addition, he reportedly socializes well with
his international counterparts, where his “genuine knowledge regarding security policy is respected” (Dagens Nyheter, 6 Febuary 1992). In contrast to the
other prime ministers, there are limited references in the empirical material
when it comes to his leadership style. One of the few things mentioned is that
Bildt is often surrounded by a group of old friends from the Moderate Party,
who all adore him, something that indicates a group-think mentality
(Expressen, 19 April 1992). In many ways, Bildt is portrayed as the opposite of
Reinfeldt´s ordinariness and inclusive leadership.
114

h ow j o u r n a l i s t s p o r t r ay p o l i t i c a l l e a d er s

Reinfeldt’s leadership style is often referred to as “listening” and “modern”
(Dagens Nyheter, 14 September 2008).
Fredrik Reinfeldt is a soft, modern boss who, in contrast to Göran Persson, listens to
his co-workers. Furthermore, he is said to be straightforward with what he wants but
allows his co-workers to work independently. Internally, he comes off as a thorough,
humble and matriarchal leader as opposed to the arrogant patriarch Göran Persson
(Aftonbladet, 11 July 2008).

Reinfeldt built his role as politician on being balanced and ordinary (Forsild,
2012). This is also illustrated in the coverage, where he is seen as a:
[…] Controlled politician who seldom allows himself to be pushed out of balance. He
came off, for the most part, as an initiator who after much reflection came to the
conclusion that Sweden is not on the right path. And he has taken on the heavy task
of turning the country in another direction (Aftonbladet, 4 September 2006).

Reinfeldt is also contrasted to Persson in relation to female voters and politicians. Apparently, female voters had a lot of confidence in him, as illustrated in
the following headline published on International Women’s Day: “Women’s
Choice: Fredrik” (Expressen, 8 March 2008). When it comes to morals, there are
a few articles dealing with the fact that he had employed au-pairs and nannies at
very low salaries. “The pattern is clear. The ‘contractual and real wages’ that the
Moderate leader speaks so amply about, do not apply when he himself employs
people. Both his political and his private morals reveal shortcomings”
(Aftonbladet, 14 September 2006). Yet, in general, Reinfeldt’s morality is not a
recurrent theme. It is possible that he would have been criticized more if he had
been a Social Democrat. There are only a few negative remarks regarding
Reinfeldt’s leadership style, such as one made by a journalist who claims that
“there is a significant trait of egocentric hubris in this eternal ‘listening’”
(Expressen, 9 August 2009). A few times, it is mentioned that he looks troubled
and too serious, clearly addressed in one article: “He has sometimes been accused of lacking both humor and charisma, but here – along with six of his closest
aides – he is relaxed and enjoys a few laughs” (Expressen, 9 November 2008).
One way of giving credit to Reinfeldt is to compare him to other popular
leaders such as the iconic former SAP leader, Tage Erlander.
Fredrik Reinfeldt is like a modern “Father of the Nation”. Calm and secure. More
youthful in his appearance than his role model Tage Erlander. He is just what a nice

115

c h a p t er 5

father in the most modern country in the world should be. […] He vacuums the
house, makes beef stew and is involved in his children’s lives. Beyond that, he builds
confidence and speaks with a firm and clear voice (Expressen, 23 May 2010).

In the passage above, the traditional Social Democratic role of the “Father of the
Nation” is interwoven with the notion of the modern man who takes an active part
in his children’s lives and in the home. Reinfeldt’s emphasis on ordinariness can be
connected to what Smith (2016) refers to as the “new man” category where political leaders are keen on appearing “like ordinary people”. References to traditional,
popular SAP leaders are also interesting in relation to Reinfeldt’s ambition to
rebrand the Moderate Party into a party for the middle and working class.

Conclusions
The study at hand sets out to explore news coverage of Swedish prime ministers and their personal characteristics from the perspective of party affiliation.
In general, the news texts show that leaders’ personalities are frequently interwoven into journalistic narratives, which is one indicator of a shift in media
coverage towards more personally oriented coverage of political leaders
(Smith, 2008). Moreover, similar to findings in the British context, the study
shows that in Swedish media coverage personal characteristics are frequently
connected to political parties, foremost in discussions of upbringing and leadership style.
Yet the study reveals no clear patterns in terms of how leaders from the
respective parties are reported on or understood. The issue of upbringing is
interesting since it is not only a way for journalists to portray the prime ministers, but also a way for the prime ministers to market themselves by embodying traditional party ideals. The prime ministers are described as embodying
their respective parties, their ideologies and policies, in various ways and
degrees. Carlsson provides the best example of how personal characteristics
are directly linked with the party, in a positive way, embodying the notion of
the “good Social Democrat”. This is done through stories of his modest upbringing, success despite structural obstacles, honesty, and low-key personality.
Persson aspires, through his personal experiences of a class society, to take on
a similar role. However, no such journalistic narrative is created. In contrast,
Persson is portrayed as embodying traditionally negative perceptions

116

h ow j o u r n a l i s t s p o r t r ay p o l i t i c a l l e a d er s

regarding the Social Democratic Party, and described as a greedy, patriarchal
person with an old-fashioned and “trade union boss” mentality. In general, the
bullying character of the news coverage of Persson raises questions regarding
journalistic norms and ethics. The two Moderate leaders are also portrayed
differently, mirroring the re-branding of the party. Whereas Bildt is depicted as
embodying a traditional stereotypical view of the Moderates as a party for the
rich and privileged, such descriptions are lacking when it comes to Reinfeldt.
Rather, Reinfeldt prefers journalists to highlight his ordinary background,
interests and life. This narrative fits much better with the re-branding of the
Moderates as a party for working and middle class people. The strategic and
deliberate use of personal characteristics and life styles as a way of authenticating the party brand is interesting and underlines the need for more research
in the intersection between public relations and journalistic studies in the
Swedish context.
The study demonstrates that there is not one standardized way in which
prime ministers have been portrayed in terms of party affiliation and personal
characteristics. This does not mean that journalists do not use preconceptions
about the various parties and their histories when reporting on political leaders. For example, both Carlsson and Persson are reported on and understood
through the lense of what it means to be a Social Democrat, but also in light of
contemporary trends in leadership ideals. One such trend is what Smith (2016)
refers to as the “new man” category, which emphasizes ordinariness in terms of
interests, habits and taste. This ideal fitted nicely into how Reinfeldt was and
wanted to be portrayed, which coincided with the re-branding of the Moderate
Party. This highlights the fact that not only party affiliation plays a role in
assessing and understanding prime ministers, but also the broader societal
trends related to what it means to be a politician. Thus, journalists’ subjective
notions become channeled through the prisms of societal norms and common
knowledge. It should also be noted that other aspects beyond journalistic attitudes and trends have an impact, such as the strength of the opposition, the
prime minister’s position within his/her own party, as well as the success of
various public relations efforts. Moreover, there is a need to further explore the
role of journalism, including the lack of journalistic scrutiny, in an era characterized by an increasing use of social media and the ability for political actors
to communicate directly with their audience.

117

c h a p t er 5

References
Adam, S. & Maier, M. (2010). Personalization of Politics: A Critical Review and Agenda
for Research. In C.T. Salmon (Ed.), Communication Yearbook 34 (pp. 213–257).
London: Routledge.
Alexander, J.C. (2011). Performance and Power. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Altheide, D.L. & Snow, R.P. (1979). Media Logic. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Barrling Hermansson, K. (2004). Partikulturer: Kollektiva självbilder och normer i Sverige
Riksdag. Doctoral dissertation, Acta Universitatis Upsaliensis.
Bjerling, Johannes (2012). The Personalisation of Swedish Politics. Party Leaders in the
Election Coverage 1979–2010. Göteborg: JMG/Göteborgs universitet.
Campus, D. (2010). Mediatization and Personalization of Politics in Italy and France: The
Cases of Berlusconi and Sarkozy. The International Journal of Press/Politics, 15(2),
219–235.
Corner, J. (2000). Mediated Persona and Political Culture: Dimensions of Structure and
Process. European Journal of Cultural Studies, 3(3), 386–402.
Ekengren, A.M. & Oscarsson, H. (2015). Ett liv efter Nya Moderaterna? Statsvetenskaplig
tidskrift, 117(2), 153–168.
Foley, M. (2008). The Presidential Dynamics of Leadership Decline in Contemporary
British Politics: The Illustrative Case of Tony Blair. Contemporary Politics, 14(1), 53–69.
Forsild, T. (2012). Fredrik Reinfeldt och litteraturens (problematiska) värld.
Statsvetenskaplig tidskrift, 114(3), 369–384.
Gaffney, J. & Lahel, A. (2013). Political Performance and Leadership Persona: The UK
Labour Party Conference of 2012. Government and Opposition, 48(04), 481–505.
Gustafsson, A.W. (2013). Skriftpraktiker, diskursiva praktiker och analytisk konsekvens.
Språk & Stil, 23, 85–106.
Helms, L. (2012). Democratic Political Leadership in the New Media Age: A Farewell to
Excellence? The British Journal of Politics and International Relations, 14(4), 651–670.
Holtz-Bacha, C., Langer, A.I. & Merkle, S. (2014). The Personalization of Politics in
Comparative Perspective: Campaign Coverage in Germany and the United Kingdom.
European Journal of Communication, 29(2), 153–170.
Johansson, B. (2008). Popularized Election coverage? News Coverage of Swedish
Parliamentary Elections 1979–2006. In J. Strömbäck, M. Ørsten & T. Aalberg (Eds.),
Communicating Politics: Political Communication in the Nordic Countries (pp. 181–
193). Gothenburg: University of Gothenburg.
Kriesi, H. (2012). Personalization of National Election Campaigns. Party Politics, 18(6),
825–844.
Karvonen, L. (2010). The Personalisation of Politics: A Study of Parliamentary
Democracies. Ecpr Press.
Langer, A.I. (2006). The Politicisation of Private Persona: The Case of Tony Blair in
Historical Perspective. Doctoral dissertation. London School of Economics and Political
Science, University of London.

118

h ow j o u r n a l i s t s p o r t r ay p o l i t i c a l l e a d er s

Langer, A.I. (2007). A Historical Exploration of the Personalisation of Politics in the Print
Media: The British Prime Ministers (1945–1999). Parliamentary Affairs, 60(3), 371–387.
Langer, A. I. (2010). The Politicization of Private Persona: Exceptional Leaders or the New
Rule? The Case of the United Kingdom and the Blair Effect. The International Journal
of Press/Politics, 15(1), 60–76.
Madestam, J. (2009). En kompispappa och en ytlig djuping: Partieliters ambivalenta
partiledarideal (Doctoral dissertation). Department of Political Science, Stockholm
University.
Mazzoleni, G. & Schultz, W. (1999). ‘Mediatization’ of Politics: A Challenge for
Democracy? Political Communication, 16(3), 247–261.
Nord, L.W. (2006). Still the Middle Way. A Study of Political Communication Practices in
Swedish Election Campaigns. The Harvard International Journal of Press/Politics, 11(1),
64–76.
Oegema, D. & Kleinnijenhuis, J. (2000) Personalization in Political Television News: A 13Wave Survey Study to Assess Effects of Text and Footage. Communications, 25(1), 43–60.
Oliva, M. (2014). Celebrity, Class and Gender in Spain: An Analysis of Belén Esteban’s
Image. Celebrity Studies, 5(4), 438–454.
Petersson, O., Djerf-Pierre, M., Holmberg, S., Strömbäck, J. & Weibull, L. (2006).
Mediernas valmakt. Stockholm: SNS Förlag.
Premfors, R. & Sundström, G. (2007). Regeringskansliet. Malmö: Liber
Pauli, P. (2012). Rörelsens ledare: Karriärvägar och ledarideal i den svenska arbetarrörelsen
under 1900-talet. Department of Historical Studies; Institutionen för historiska studier.
Reinemann, C. & Wilke, J. (2001). Do the Candidates Matter? Long-term Trends of
Campaign Coverage: A Study of the German Press since 1949. European Journal of
Communication 16(3), 291–314.
Reinemann, C. & Wilke, J. (2007). It’s the Debates, Stupid! How the Introduction of
Televised Debates changed the Portrayal of Chancellor Candidates in the German
Press, 1949–2005. International Journal of Press/Politics 12(4), 92–111.
Skeggs, B. (2004). Class, Self, Culture. London: Routledge
Smith, G. (2009). Conceptualizing and Testing Brand Personality in British
Politics. Journal of Political Marketing, 8(3), 209–232.
Smith, A. (2008). ‘New Man’or ‘Son of the Manse’? Gordon Brown as a Reluctant
Celebrity Father. British Politics, 3(4), 556–575.
Smith, A. (2016). Mediated Political Masculinities: The Commander-in-chief vs. the New
Man. Social Semiotics, 26(1), 94–110.
Stanyer, J. (2013). Intimate Politics: Publicity, Privacy and the Personal Lives of Politicians
in Media Saturated Democracies. Oxford: John Wiley & Sons.
Sundström, G. (2009). ‘He Who Decides’: Swedish Social Democratic Governments from
a Presidentialisation Perspective. Scandinavian Political Studies, 32(2), 143–170.
Van Zoonen, L. (2006). The Personal, the Political and the Popular: A Women’s Guide to
Celebrity Politics. European Journal of Cultural Studies, 9(3), 287–301.

119

