The Knowledge Engineering Review, Vol. 29:5, 582-638. © Cambridge University Press, 2013
doi:10.1017/S02698889 13000039
First published online 3 April 2013

A multidisciplinary survey on discrimination analysis

ANDREA ROMETI and SALVATORE RUGGIERI

Dipartimento di Informatica, Universita di Pisa, Largo B. Pontecorvo 3, 56127 Pisa, Italy;
e-mail: romei@di.unipi.it, ruggieri@ di-unipi.it

Abstract

The collection and analysis of observational and experimental data represent the main tools for
assessing the presence, the extent, the nature, and the trend of discrimination phenomena. Data
analysis techniques have been proposed in the last 50 years in the economic, legal, statistical, and,
recently, in the data mining literature. This is not surprising, since discrimination analysis is a
multidisciplinary problem, involving sociological causes, legal argumentations, economic models,
statistical techniques, and computational issues. The objective of this survey is to provide a
guidance and a glue for researchers and anti-discrimination data analysts on concepts, problems,
application areas, datasets, methods, and approaches from a multidisciplinary perspective. We
organize the approaches according to their method of data collection as observational, quasi-
experimental, and experimental studies. A fourth line of recently blooming research on knowledge
discovery based methods is also covered. Observational methods are further categorized on the
basis of their application context: labor economics, social profiling, consumer markets, and others.

1 Introduction

Discrimination refers to an unjustified difference in treatment on the basis of any physical or
cultural trait, such as sex, ethnic origin, religion, or political opinions. The problems of assessing
the presence, extent, nature, and trends of discrimination and of preventing discrimination in
(possibly automated) decision making are thus of primary importance. In the last 50 years, such
problems have been investigated from a social, legal, economic, and, recently, from a computer
science perspective. The issues of data collection and data analysis are persistent, bringing together
all these perspectives. We present an annotated multidisciplinary bibliography, with a focus on the
methods for data collection and for data analysis. According to the statistical principles of design, we
classify approaches as observational, quasi-experimental, and experimental studies, on the basis of
whether data are collected by merely observing existing situations, or by controlling the factors that
might affect discriminatory decisions. Since observational studies represent the vast majority, we
further categorize observational approaches in terms of context, the main ones being labor economics,
social profiling, and consumer markets. We consider a fourth class of recent studies, based on
knowledge discovery, which poses new challenges on the discovery and prevention of discrimination.

Discrimination data analysis is very topical. The ease of data storage and retention, the ever-
increasing computing power, and the development of intelligent data analysis and mining techniques
make it possible to apply ‘in-the-large’ and to improve classical statistical and econometric techniques.
The reference literature, however, is spread over many disciplines: social sciences, psychology,
economics, finance, health research, housing and urban development, statistics, biometrics,
econometrics, and data mining. Our primary objective is to survey from a data collection and data
analysis perspective the main problems, techniques, and approaches adopted in the literature,
giving priority to recent works that have not yet been surveyed.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
A multidisciplinary survey on discrimination analysis 583

This paper is structured as follows. After introducing the relevant concepts from social and
legal perspectives in Section 2, we overview the basic statistical tools adopted for discrimination
data analysis in Section 3, including a discussion of technical issues arising in legal contexts. We
then survey four mainstream groups of studies: observational (Sections 4-7), quasi-experimental
(Section 8), experimental (Section 9), and knowledge discovery (Section 10). Approaches in the
first group are further split according to the application context: labor economics (Section 4),
social profiling (Section 5), credit and consumer markets (Section 6), and other contexts (Section
7). Sections 4-9 are organized into three parts: first, we present the general approach of the line of
research, with particular emphasis on how data are collected; then, we present some technical
details of the underlying data analysis techniques; finally, we provide an annotated bibliography
of the literature. Sections 7 and 10 include only the annotated bibliography, since they cover
miscellaneous contexts and/or techniques.

2 Background

Discrimination refers to an unjustified distinction of individuals based on their membership, or
perceived membership, in a certain group or category. Justified distinctions are exceptions explicitly
admitted by law, such as imposing a minimum age for voting in elections, or that are proven
(sometimes in court) as being objective and legitimate, such as requiring a man for a male character in
a film. Some groups, traditionally subject to discrimination, are explicitly listed as ‘protected groups’
by national and international human rights laws. These and other faceted components of the broad
definition of discrimination are introduced in the next sub-sections.

2.1 Grounds of discrimination, protected groups, and multiple discrimination

Human rights laws prohibit discrimination on the grounds of sex, gender, sexual orientation’,
race, ethnicity”, skin color, social origin, genetic features, language, religion or belief, political or
other personal opinion, membership of a national minority, property, birth, parentage, disability,
illness, marital status, or age. Legislations and research studies have evolved with a different focus
on vulnerable groups, sometimes restricting themselves to specific settings, including credit and
insurance, sale, rental, and financing of housing, personnel selection and wages, access to public
accommodation, and education. For instance, discrimination against blacks is dealt with to a large
extent by studies from the United States (US), while discrimination against Roma people has been
mainly considered by European Union (EU) studies. In this survey, we do not restrict our
attention to a specific group. We assume that, in principle, discrimination can take place based on
any physical or cultural trait, and in any setting of everyday life. Hereafter protected group will be
used to denote a group or category of people that are the subject of discrimination analysis,
irrespectively of whether there is any national or international law, which explicitly protects the
group from discrimination in the specific settings covered by such legislation.

Although the aforementioned grounds for discrimination are typically considered separately,
the interaction of multiple forms of discrimination has been receiving increasing attention (European
Commission, 2007; European Network Against Racism (ENAR), 2007). An elderly disabled woman,

' Sex refers to a person’s biological status, categorized as male, female, or intersex; gender refers to the

attitudes and behaviors that a culture associates with a person’s sex, categorized as masculine, feminine and
transgender; sexual orientation refers to the sex of those to whom one is sexually and romantically attracted,
categorized as homosexual, heterosexual, and bisexual. See American Psychological Association (2011) for a
psychological discussion of the differences between the terms, and Case (1995) for a discussion with reference
to the US anti-discrimination law.

2 Race is a social construct to categorize people into groups. The term is controversial, and with little
consensus on its actual meaning. Blank et a/. (2004: Ch. 2) summarize biological and social concepts of race,
and discuss US categorizations of races used for data collection, for example, in census data. Ethnicity refers
to self-identifying groups based on beliefs concerning shared culture, ancestry and history.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
584 A. ROMEI AND S. RUGGIERI

for example, could be discriminated against for being above a certain age, because she is a woman,
because she is disabled, or any combination of these. Multiple discrimination comes into play when a
person is discriminated against on the basis of different characteristics at different times: each type of
discrimination works independently, according to distinct experiences, and multiple discrimination
refers to their cumulative impact. When different grounds operate at the same time, then this is known
as compound or intersectional discrimination. Compound discrimination occurs when each ground
adds to discrimination on other grounds, for example migrant women experiencing both under-
employment (such as migrants compared with local residents) and lower pay (such as female workers
compared with male workers). Intersectional discrimination occurs when concurrent acts of dis-
crimination result in a specific and distinct form of discrimination, for example, as reported by
Makkonen (2002), as in the case of Afro-American women stereotypes, which when taken in isolation
cover neither women nor Afro-Americans.

2.2 Direct discrimination, indirect discrimination, objective justification, and tokenism

From a legal perspective, discrimination arises only through the application of different rules or
practices to comparable situations or of the same rule or practice to different situations (Tobler,
2008). When such rules or practices explicitly treat one person less favorably on forbidden grounds
than another is, has been or would be treated in a comparable situation, this is known as direct
discrimination, sometimes called systematic discrimination or disparate treatment. On the other
hand, indirect discrimination, sometimes called disparate impact, is an apparently neutral provi-
sion, criterion or practice, which results in an unfair treatment of a protected group.

Direct discrimination is intentional and ‘directed’ towards individuals, typically on the basis of
their visible traits. One example of an act of direct discrimination would be the refusal to serve
Roma people in a restaurant. Direct discrimination is difficult to prove, since the complainant has
to demonstrate the intent to discriminate. In the previous example, a sign stating ‘we do not serve
Roma’ or some testimony would need to be provided by the complainant.

Indirect discrimination occurs via apparently neutral practices that take into account personal
attributes correlated with indicators of race, gender, and other discriminatory grounds. Laws on
indirect discrimination are concerned with avoiding the circumvention of the prohibition to dis-
criminate, and to enforce such a prohibition substantively, even in the case of unintentionality. A
landmark US law case (Griggs v. Duke Power Co., 1971) concerned the requirement of a high-
school diploma for an unskilled job for which no literacy was needed, which practically excluded
most black applicants. A presumption of indirect discrimination on a group is typically based on
observing that the effects of some rules or practices have put the group in an adverse position. The
burden of proof then shifts onto the defendant, who has to establish the absence of discrimination
by providing an objective and reasonable justification.

Objective justifications are accounted for by anti-discrimination laws. In direct discrimination,
a genuine occupational requirement, also called a business necessity in (US Federal Legislation,
2012, (f)), occurs when the ability to perform a job effectively is substantially reduced for people
with certain characteristics. One example is advertising for an actor to interpret a male character in
a film is a genuine occupational requirement that overcomes direct discrimination against women.
In indirect discrimination, an objective justification of the effects of disparate impact is admitted if
‘objectively justified by a legitimate aim and the means of achieving that aim are appropriate and
necessary’ (Ellis, 2005). For example, selecting applicants on the basis of their truck-driving
licence, which is a legitimate aim (for a transport company seeking a truck driver), overcomes
indirect discrimination against women, who are less likely to fulfill such a requirement than men.
The cause of this indirect discrimination is an unavoidable and justified business necessity.

Examples of practices that are not objective justifications are tokenism and reverse tokenism.
Tokenism (see Kanter, 1977) consists of granting a benefit to a few members of a minority group,
called tokens, to create the false appearance of inclusiveness and prevent accusations of dis-
crimination. For instance, hiring a black person in a mostly white workplace, or a woman in a

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
A multidisciplinary survey on discrimination analysis 585

traditionally male occupation. Reverse tokenism consists of denying a benefit to a few qualified
members of the majority group, again called tokens, to create the false appearance of equality and
prevent charges of discrimination. This is achieved by exhibiting these cases, the tokens, who are
as qualified as members of minority groups to receive a certain benefit but who have been denied
the benefit. For instance, by denying a loan to a qualified domestic worker, a bank sacrifices a
good candidate for the sake of exhibiting a qualified comparator against immigrant workers with
denied loans.

2.3 Causes of discrimination

While it is out of the scope of this survey to clearly identify the social and psychological factors
that cause discrimination, we discuss three possible causes with reference to the amount and the
type of information that social groups know about each other: prejudice (no information on
individuals, no information on their group), statistical thinking (no information on individuals,
average performances of people in their group), and unintentionality (information on individuals,
no information on effects of decisions). The first two causes form the basis of the economic models
of discrimination that will be presented later on.

A common source of discrimination is prejudice, which literally means to judge another person
or group a priori. Prejudice leads to discrimination when it concerns unfairly or unreasonably
formed negative attitudes against a protected group. These negative attitudes are produced by
social distance, negative stereotypes, and negative feelings, all of which reinforce one another
(Brown, 2010). Social distance means scarce familiarity with the members of the protected group,
either voluntary or as the effect of segregation (e.g. by residence location or job type), and the
strong influence of the norms of one’s own group. Negative feelings are affective components of
the belief, at the root, for instance, of racism and sexism. Negative stereotypes are popular beliefs
that some negative characteristics are common to all or most of the members of a group. The
vicious cycle of discrimination (Newman, 2008) starts from a situation where prejudice causes a
protected group to be socially disadvantaged. This is interpreted as evidence that the group is
inferior, which, in turn, creates renewed prejudice by increasing social distance, by reinforcing
negative stereotypes, and by legitimating negative feelings. Psychologists have investigated
situations of anxiety or concerns, called stereotype threats (Steele & Aronson, 1995), where
individuals have the potential to confirm a negative stereotype of their social group, which then
result in the reduced performances of individuals. We refer to Whitley and Kite (2009) for a
psychological discussion of prejudice’.

A second source of discrimination is statistical thinking, also called rational racism (Harford,
2008). This occurs when the lack of knowledge regarding the skills, productivity, or the impact of
an individual is compensated for by a prior knowledge of the average performances of the group
or category the individual belongs to. This is the case, for instance, when employers refer directly
or indirectly to the average performance of the applicant’s racial group as a decision element.
Another form of statistical thinking occurs when an employer foresees a negative impact on
his/her business in hiring an applicant due to the prejudice of the customers against any worker of
the applicant group.

Finally, unintentional discrimination occurs not because of malevolent decisions, but due to a lack of
awareness on the effects of the decision. This is the case of indifference, incorrect (execution of)
procedures or practices, lack of planning, and analysis of decision outcomes. A form of unconscious or
implicit discrimination has also been considered in the cognitive, economic, and legal literature
(Bertrand et al., 2005; Greenwald & Krieger, 2006; Kang & Lane, 2010). Systematic implicit
preferences in favor of socially privileged groups have been observed: young over old, white over
black, light skinned over dark skinned, other people over Arab-Muslim, abled over disabled, thin over
obese, and straight over gay. Indirect and unintentional discrimination pose considerable problems

See also http: //www.understandingprejudice.org for a collection of prejudice-related resources.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
586 A. ROMEI AND S. RUGGIERI

for data analysts to carefully take into account the effects of decisions due to their unforeseen
discriminatory effects.

2.4 Affirmative actions, reverse discrimination, and favoritism

Affirmative actions, sometimes called positive actions, are a range of policies to overcome and to
compensate by providing opportunities for those traditionally discriminated against (Holzer &
Neumark, 2004; Sowell, 2005; ENAR, 2008). They range from the mere encouragement of
underrepresented groups to preferential treatment or quotas in favor of these groups. US federal
contractors, for example, are required to identify and set goals for hiring underutilized minorities
and women (Holzer & Neumark, 2006). Universities have voluntarily implemented admission
policies that give preferential treatment to women and minority candidates (Lerner & Nagai,
2000). Reverse discrimination, sometimes identified with affirmative actions, is the disadvantage
that the non-members of protected groups suffer as a result of affirmative actions. Affirmative
action policies ‘shall in no case entail as a consequence the maintenance of unequal or separate
rights for different racial groups after the objectives for which they were taken have been achieved’
(United Nations Legislation, 2012, (d)). It is therefore important to assess and to monitor the
application of affirmative actions.

Favoritism (sometimes called nepotism) refers to occasions when individuals appear to have
been treated better than others for reasons not related to individual merit, business necessity or
affirmative actions. Kim (2007), for example, has studied political decisions, such as the dis-
tribution of income across regions or groups, which can be discretionary and favor the group or
district that a politician belongs to. The difference between affirmative action and favoritism lies
then in the group that is favored: in affirmative action, the group is historically disadvantaged and
the practice is recommended or required by law. In favoritism, the group is favored for reasons,
such as family relationship, that are not supported by explicit rules or legislation. Not surprisingly,
favoritism can also refer to members of protected groups, such as in the case of university
admissions of black students due to their sporting competitiveness. Discrimination and favoritism
are dual concepts: if a protected group is discriminated against in a certain context, then the
remaining people in the same context are favored. Strictly speaking, however, we reserve the term
favoritism for the unfair (positive) treatment of members of a specific group, and not as the
implicit consequence of the discrimination of other groups. Yamagishi et a/. (1999) have reviewed
the social theories of in-group favoritism.

2.5 Formal equality, substantive equality, group under-representation, and prima-facie evidence

Provisions on equality or non-discrimination* are firmly embedded within the key human rights
treaties of the United Nations Legislation (2012). Anti-discrimination laws, however, have evolved
differently in common law countries compared with civil law countries. US Federal Legislation
(2012), UK Legislation (2012), and Australian Legislation (2012) follow the common law char-
acteristic of ‘the absence of systematization, or a desire thereof’ (Schiek e¢ a/., 2007, Introductory
Chapter), with the result that laws have been developed on a ground-by-ground basis and with
reference to specific contexts, possibly with different rulings from one case to another. European
Union Legislation (2012) and EU member states follow a principled approach, resulting in laws
covering a (long) list of grounds for discrimination. For a more thorough legal discussion and
comparison of national and international laws, see the following books: on international group
rights by Lerner (2003) and Schiek et al. (2007); on EU laws by Ellis (2005) and EU Agency for
Fundamental Rights (2011); and on US laws by Bamforth e¢ a/. (2008).

+ While semantically equivalent, the term ‘non-discrimination law’ recalls a set of negative obligations, while
‘equality law’ recalls, in addition, a set of positive obligations to reach the ideal of equal treatment. See Bell
(2002).

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
A multidisciplinary survey on discrimination analysis 587

The legal debate contrasts formal equality with substantive equality (Barnard & Hepple, 2000).
Formal equality, or equality of treatments, is based on the principle that ‘things that are alike
should be treated alike’. Hence, individuals should be treated on the basis of their own merits, not
on the basis of irrelevant physical or personal characteristics. This is the widespread understanding
of non-discrimination today. In substantive equality, or equality of outcomes, individuals are
treated differently on the basis of their differences, and in particular of the disadvantages asso-
ciated with protected groups, with the goal of reaching fair outcomes in decisions. Affirmative
actions and the combat of indirect discrimination are based on a distributive principle of justice,
which in itself is aimed at substantive equality.

Several independent authorities (equality enforcement bodies, regulation boards, consumer advisory
councils, commissions) provide advice, monitor, and report on discrimination compliances. For
instance, the European Commission® publishes an annual report on the progress in implementing the
Equal Treatment Directives by the member states (Chopin & Do, 2010); and in the United States, the
Attorney General reports to the Congress regarding the annual referrals to the Equal Credit Oppor-
tunity Act. In many cases, anti-discrimination authorities have the power to conduct investigations and
inquiries, up to quasi-judicial functions. They carry out research, promote actions in favor of sub-
stantive equality, and make recommendations to governments. A comparison of methods adopted by
law enforcement officials and by academics (mainly, economists) is reported by Ross and Yinger (2006).

The problems of data collection and assessment, and of discrimination measurement are
recognized as fundamental issues to be addressed by both EU (Makkonen, 2006, 2007) and US
(Blank et a/., 2004) authorities. The recourse to data analysis and statistical evidence is also a
typical scenario in discrimination litigation, with manuals instructing judges to become acquainted
with the characteristics and reasonings of science (Kaye & Freedman, 2011). One general legal
principle is to consider group under-representation in obtaining a benefit, or alternatively group
over-representation in being denied a benefit, as a quantitative measure of (indirect) discrimination
against a protected group. It is commonly agreed, however, that statistical conclusions establish a
prima facie® evidence of discrimination, which may be rebutted by the respondent using further
arguments, for example an objective justification.

3 Statistical tools
3.1 Statistical data analysis

Statistical tools and methods have been widely adopted, both in legal and in economic analyses, in
performing data collection and sampling, statistical inference, correlation, and regression. The
sources of data are categorized on the basis of the level of control the analyst has: in an experi-
ment, the analyst has control over all independent variables; in quasi-experiments, only a few
variables are controlled for; and in observational studies, the analyst has no control over the
variables. Observational studies are much more frequent than experiments, with data collected
from historical records or from surveys. This gives rise to issues regarding the reliability of the data
collection, the completeness of the relevant variables, the absence of confounding variables, and
the non-existence of plausible alternative explanations (Fienberg et a/., 1995).

As observed by Wingate and Thornton (2000), the frequentist approach to statistics has been
mainly adopted as prima facie evidence in law cases, while the Bayesian approach has seldom been
applied. A common tool for statistical analysis is provided by a 2 X 2, or fourfold, contingency
table, as shown in Figure 1, or, more generally, by a k X 2 table, where & is the number of groups

See also the European Network of Legal Experts (http: //www.non-discrimination.net), the EU
Agency for Fundamental Rights (http: //fra.europa.eu), and the Migration Policy Group (http://
www.migpolgroup.com).

& Prima facie is a Latin term meaning ‘at first look’, or ‘on its face’, and refers to evidence, which, unless
rebutted, would be sufficient to prove a particular proposition or fact.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
588 A. ROMEI AND S. RUGGIERI

 

 

benefit
group denied granted
protected a 6 ny
unprotected c d na
my m2 n

 

 

pi=a/m pa=e/ng p=mi/n

l-p — RR _ a/b -p- _ Pi _
1—pa “ROT e/g BP=P—P BR= | C=

1l-pi

 

 

RD=pi—-p. RR=" RO=
p2

1-p

Figure 1 Fourfold contingency table and discrimination measures

0.8

0.6

p2

0.4

0.2

   

0
0 0.2 0.4 06 0.8 . . .! . F . 0.6 0.8 1

pt pi

Figure 2. Level curves of RR, OR, and RD over the 2-D risk plane. RR = relative risk; OR = odds ratio;
RD = risk difference

(identified by race, education level, or other characteristics), and 2 is the number of possible
outcomes (in the figure, benefit denied or granted). Different outcomes between groups are
measured in terms of the proportion of people in each group with a specific outcome. Figure 1
considers the proportions of benefits denied for the protected group (p;), the unprotected group
(p2) and the overall sample (p). The differences and rates of these proportions can be seen as
the formal counterpart of the legal principle of group under-representation. They are known in
statistics as the risk difference (RD = p; — p>), also known as absolute risk reduction; risk ratio or
relative risk (RR = p,/p2); relative chance (RC = (1 — p;)/(1 — p>)), also known as selection rate;
odds ratio (OR = RR/RC = p,(1 — p2)/(p2(1 — p1))). The versions of RD, RR, and RC when the
protected group is compared with the average proportion p, rather than to the proportion of the
unprotected group are also reported: extended difference (ED = p; — p); extended ratio or extended
lift (ER = p,/p); and extended chance (EC = (1 — p;)/(1 — p)). Level curves of RR, OR, and RD
over the 2-D risk plane are shown in Figure 2. A level curve represents the points of the 2-D risk
plane with a fixed value of the reference measure. When p;~0, then ORRR. Apart from this
well-known relation, the relative order imposed by the various measures over the points of the 2-D
risk plane can be dramatically different (Pedreschi ez a/., 2012). The names of the measures come
mainly from bio-statistics and epidemiological comparative studies between two dichotomous
groups. RC comes from the literature on employment discrimination. Recent work on data mining
for discrimination discovery has introduced the ED, ER, and EC measures (Pedreschi et al., 2009;
Ruggieri ez a/., 2010b). Finally, the name 2-D risk plane is due to Li and Yang (2007).

Statistical tests and confidence intervals for the difference, ratio, and odds of proportions have
been proposed over the last 50 years. Let us denote by 7; and 7, the true proportions of p; and py.
Difference, ratio, and odds of 7, and 7> follow discrete distribution probabilities. However, when
the numbers in the contingency table are large, the distributions can be asymptotically approxi-
mated by a normal or a log-normal distribution. Based on this, Wald confidence intervals can be
calculated. As an example, for risk difference, called p = p,—p, the confidence interval at the
significance level of 100(1 — « )% for 7, — 72 is [p—d, p + d] where:

pill — pi) . p2(1 — pr)

d= Z 1-4/2
ny ny

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
A multidisciplinary survey on discrimination analysis 589

See Leung and Kupper (1981), Farrington and Manning (1990), Newcombe (1998), Agresti
(2002), Fleiss e¢ al. (2003), and Tian e¢ al. (2008) for details, other confidence intervals, and for
comparisons of estimation methods. In order to improve the approximation of a discrete dis-
tribution by the normal or log-normal distribution, several ‘corrections for continuity’ have been
proposed, such as Yates’s correction and the Mid-p method (Agresti, 2002), or the simple but
effective plus-4 method (Agresti & Brian, 2000), which consists of adding 72/4 cases to each cell in
the contingency table. When the numbers in a contingency table are very low, the approximation
to the normal distribution becomes imprecise. Exact methods have been proposed in the statistical
literature, where ‘exact’ means that the actual discrete distribution of the statistical parameter is
adopted in computing the confidence intervals. The original work on the subject traces back to
Fisher’s exact method for a single proportion. The issues here are twofold and contrasting:
intervals should ideally have a width that is as strict as possible, yet precise calculations of discrete
distributions are computationally expensive.

In order to evaluate whether the difference between groups is due to a third control variable, for
example, high/low education level, a 2 X 2 xX 2 table is required, with numbers for each combi-
nation of group, education level, and outcome. A Mantel-Haenszel test compares the denial rates
for protected and unprotected groups within strata defined by education level. See Agresti (2002)
and Fleiss ez a/. (2003) for the Mantel-Haenszel procedure, and Gastwirth (1984), Finkelstein and
Levin (2001) for a discussion of its use in legal cases. As observed by Quillian (2006), ‘the statistical
analysis relies upon measuring racial discrimination as a residual: discrimination is the remaining racial
[in general, group] difference after statistically accounting for all other race-related [group-related]
influences on the outcome’, such as the education level in the previous example. However, since it
is difficult to know whether all important influences (called factors in statistical terms) have been
taken into account’, ‘statistical decomposition is better viewed as a method to assess how much of
a racial gap can be accounted for by measured factors rather than as a method to measure
discrimination per se’. The sensitivity of statistical methods regarding the uncertainty due to the
omitted variable bias has been studied: for measures over contingency tables (Gastwirth, 1992b);
for matched pairs or audits, which will be introduced in Section 8 (Gastwirth e¢ a/., 1998); and, for
the Mantel-Haenszel test (Yu & Gastwirth, 2008).

For general k X 2 contingency tables, the Pearson y~-test is adopted to test the independence
of the outcome for the k groups. When the outcome is an ordinal variable, such as a rank,
the difference in treatment between a protected and an unprotected group can be evaluated by
Wilcoxon’s signed-ranks test. For continuous outcomes, such as wages or loan rates, the significance
of the average difference of outcome between groups can be evaluated by Student’s tests. See classical
handbooks on non-parametric statistical procedures for details (e.g. Siegel & Castellan, 1988;
Sheskin, 2004).

In economic research, the analytical tool adopted shifts from contingency tables to regression
analysis. Let Y be a continuous dependent variable, such as salary, and X1, ..., X;, be continuous
or binary independent variables, which are potentially useful (and legally plausible) in explaining
Y, such as the employee’s education, skills, experience, productivity, job grade, responsibilities,
and working time. In addition, let D be a continuous or binary independent variable concerning
the grounds of possible discrimination, such as the employee’s age range or female gender indi-

cator. Regression analysis consists of extracting a linear model describing Yin terms of X), ..., Xx
and D from data, in our case from employees’ data. Technically, it consists of calculating para-
meters a, Bo, ..., 8, that best fit a set of equations:

Y¥; = aD; + Bo + Bi Xe +--+ + BXik + &

where i= 1... is a set of cases, in our example, employees. The ¢ variable models residuals, that is, the
difference between the actual Y; and the value resulting from the right-hand side (except ¢;). The least
square minimization method is a common way of estimating the coefficients a, 6), ...,8,. This is

7 A recurring problem known as the omitted-variable bias.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
590 A. ROMEI AND S. RUGGIERI

known as the OLS (ordinary least squares) regression method. Models that overcome the linear
assumption by constraining the range of the dependent variable are known as Tobit regressions
(Amemiya, 1984). Measures of fit include the mean squared error, and the squared multiple
correlation (R?). Under the assumption that the residuals are identically and independently dis-
tributed normal variables with mean zero, a, and the B,’s can be interpreted as estimators of the
linear model over the entire population. As a consequence, an a #0 at some confidence level, can
be interpreted as the weight of the discrimination grounds D in affecting the dependent variable.
Critical issues in regression analysis include the choice of the independent variables, which could
be legally debated in terms of relevance and completeness; the presence of erroneous, missing, and
extreme values in data; and the multi-collinearity of variables, namely the overlap of information,
especially among D and other variables, for example, such as in race and education. See the paper
by McCabe (1992) and the book by Finkelstein and Levin (2001) for details. Greene (2008) is a
classic reference on econometric analysis.

Linear regression can be adopted in the context of binary decisions by considering as the
dependent variable a (continuous) function /(P(Y = granted)) of the probability P( Y = granted)
that the binary variable Y assumes a specific value, say, benefit granted. When /() is the logit
function logit(P) = log(P/(1—P)), the value a can then be interpreted as the variation coefficient
of the logarithm of the odds of the event Y= granted due to the presence of the discrimination
grounds, all other predictors being constant. This is known as the logit regression model. When fis
the CDF (cumulative distribution function) of the unit normal distribution, we end up with the
probit regression model. Classical books on generalized linear models are by McCullagh and
Nelder (1989), Hardin and Hilbe (2007), and Dobson and Barnett (2008).

Finally, approaches based on causal reasoning (Pearl, 2009a, 2009b), have an immediate
application in discrimination analysis. The direct casual effect of sex, race or other discrimination
grounds, on the dependent variable is the sensitivity of the dependent variable to changes in the
discrimination grounds while all other variables are held fixed. Stated in legal terms, ‘the central
question in any employment-discrimination case is whether the employer would have taken the
same action had the employee been of a different race (age, sex, religion, national origin, etc.) and
everything else had been the same’ (Carson v. Bethlehem Steel Corp., 1996).

3.2 Legally grounded data analysis

As observed by Gastwirth (1992a), the objectives of science and the law often diverge, with rigorous
scientific methods conflicting with the adversarial nature of the legal system. Statistical evidence in
discrimination cases, mainly in employment, is considered as particularly persuasive. The book by
Finkelstein and Levin (2001) reports several law cases to illustrate the statistical methods used to
interpret disparity: in pass/fail proficiency tests for Afro-Americans and Hispanic groups; in jury
member selection for Mexican-American groups; in hiring black teachers or black lawyers; in pro-
moting black employees of a bank/police department; in granting wage additives to racial groups of
employees; in the employment termination of elderly employees; in the time taken to promote female
employees; in the salaries between male/female or black/white employees; and in mortgage lending
between blacks and whites. The legal principle of group under-representation readily fits in the statistical
analysis of contingency tables as in Figure 1. The main issues in legal trials consist of determining the
relevant population, also known as the poo/ of comparators, the discrimination measure that formalizes
group under-representation, and the threshold that constitutes prima facie evidence of discrimination.

Relevant population. This means deciding where # is drawn from in Figure 1. There are several
possibilities, and the actual choice depends on the specific legal case: the total population of a
state, such as in a jury selection discrimination case; the set of eligible people for a position, such as
the labor force in an employment discrimination case; and the set of applicants for a benefit, such
as in a loan/mortgage discrimination case. The choice of the relevant population is decisive in an
indirect discrimination claim, since it influences the measurement of the group’s under-representation.
Shoben (1992) discusses the various choices in the context of employment discrimination. Interestingly,

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
A multidisciplinary survey on discrimination analysis 591

a well-known defence strategy in discrimination allegations is related to Simpson’s paradox of
statistical analysis. Bickel et al. (1975) describe a real case of possible discrimination against
women in university admissions. The numbers at university level showed a disproportion between
male and female candidates. However, when the numbers were split at a departmental level, the
disproportion was no longer observed. Since the examination boards worked at a departmental
level, then the correct numbers to be considered are the latter, while the numbers at a university
level contain confounding factors (the boards that took decisions).

Discrimination measures. Various measures are adopted worldwide. UK Legislation (2012)(a)
mentions risk difference, the EU Court of Justice has focused more on the risk ratio (Schiek et ai.,
2007, Section 3.5), and US laws and courts mainly refer to the selection rate. Notice that the risk
ratio is the ratio of the proportions of benefit denial between the protected and unprotected
groups, while the selection rate is the ratio of the proportions of benefit granting. The odds ratio
has been widely considered in legal research studies. This is only an approximation of a multi-
faceted reality, where the choice of the reference measure and of the methods to evaluate its
statistical significance might be part of the debate in a trial (Piette & White, 1999).

Thresholds of group under-representation. While the European Court of Justice has emphasized
that a substantial figure of group under-representation needs to be achieved when considering
statistical evidence, no strict threshold has been laid down the EU. On the contrary, two landmark
cases led to formal thresholds in the US laws:

e The four-fifths rule, from the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (1978), states that a
job selection rate for the protected group of <4/5 (i.e. 80%) of the selection rate for the
unprotected group represents a prima facie evidence of an adverse impact (i.e. indirect
discrimination) against the protected group. In terms of the measures in Figure 1, this means
verifying that RC <0.8 at some confidence level (typically, 95%).

® The Castaneda rule (named after the Castadena vs. Partida law case, 1977, concerning jury
selection) states that the number of people of the protected group selected from a relevant
population cannot be smaller than 3 standard deviations the number expected in a random
selection (Sugrue & Fairley, 1983). In terms of the contingency table in Figure 1, assuming a
random binomial distribution with m, independent experiments each with the probability of
selecting a member of the protected group of po = /n (the fraction of the group over the total
population), the actual number 4 of selected people departs from the expected number mpo of

(mpy—b) /\/mopo{1—p)) standard deviations.

A review of statistical evidence as a proof in employment discrimination litigations is reported by
Wingate and Thornton (2000). The paper by Kaye and Aickin (1992) contains a collection of
works on the subject. A continuously updated book on statistical methods and case laws in the
United States is due to Paetzold et al. (1994). Discrimination case laws in the EU are collected by
the European Commission (2010).

4 Observational studies I: labor economic perspective

From now onwards, we detail the mainstream lines of research on discrimination data analysis by
distinguishing between studies on the basis of their main approach: observational, quasi-experimental,
and experimental. Observational studies collect data by merely observing existing situations, for
example, from census and survey data. Since the majority of approaches are observational, we further
categorize them on the basis of their specific context. We start by considering labor economic models
of discrimination and their empirical validation.

4.1 Approach and data collection

In the labor market, different treatments between groups of workers can be measured in terms of their
wages (wage differentials), of their degree of participation in the labor force (employment differentials),

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
592 A. ROMEI AND S. RUGGIERI

or of their degree of segregation in specific occupations or industries (segregation differentials).
Public surveys routinely collect data on demographic characteristics and attitudes of residents
(e.g. in the United States, the General Social Survey (GSS)), on the distribution of labor forces in
the labor market (e.g. Current Population Survey (CPS)), on the labor status of a population
sample at multiple points in time (e.g. National Longitudinal Surveys), and so on. Race and
gender differentials have been persistent over time. In the United States, for example, the 2010
unemployment rate of black men aged 25-54 years was 16.3%, compared with 8.5% of
white men®. Empirical research techniques have applied statistical inference to collected data both
with the purpose of testing the consequences predicted by a theoretical economic model, and to
assess the contribution of different types of discrimination to the different treatments in the labor
market overall. Two major theoretical models of economic discrimination have been considered in
the economic literature, namely taste-based and statistical discrimination. See Altonji and Blank
(1999) for a comprehensive mathematical introduction to both types.

Taste-based discrimination, originally proposed by the Nobel prize winner Becker (1971), has no
rational or economic basis, but only a personal prejudice against protected groups. The marginal
cost of a protected worker, say a female, is her wage plus an additional psychological disutility
factor, expressed as a discrimination coefficient. On the other hand, the marginal cost of a male
worker with equal productivity consists of his wage alone. The gap between male and female
workers increases according to the employer’s prejudices, until the labor market tends to a wages
equilibrium and to segregation of protected workers in less discriminating firms or for specific
occupations. Lower profits for discriminatory firms implies that discrimination occurs mainly in
low competitive markets. This is known as the static implication of Becker’s model. On the basis
of the identity of the discriminator, the model distinguishes between employer discrimination (taste
in hiring), customer discrimination (taste in buying), and co-employee discrimination (taste in
co-operating). Non-discriminating employers earn higher profits by hiring members of the pro-
tected group, and, in the long run and in a competitive market, discriminatory firms will be driven
out of the market—and, a fortiori, discrimination will disappear. This is known as the dynamic
implication of the Becker model. Both implications represent consequences predicted by the
theoretical model. Empirical studies are supposed to confirm or to refute such implications.
Extensions of taste-based discrimination, called search models (Altonji & Blank, 1999; Lang &
Lehmann, 2011), take into account the costs for workers of searching for jobs by interacting
with prejudiced and non-prejudiced firms, and, for consumers, the costs of searching for sellers
that belongs to their racial group. Finally, Goldberg (1982) models favoritism by assuming that
employers receive positive utility from employing members of the unprotected group rather than
the cost of employing members of the protected group.

Statistical discrimination originated from Arrow (1971) and Phelps (1972), and was systematized by
Aigner and Cain (1977), Coate and Loury (1993), and Moro and Norman (2004). It assumes statistical
thinking by employers, but a scarcity of information on worker productivity at the time of hiring. This
market imperfection gives employers an incentive to easily use observable characteristics, such as sex
and race, as a proxy for the expected productivity of workers. Employers act rationally to maximize
profits by setting wages on the basis of their prior knowledge on the average productivity of the group
the worker belongs to. As a result, workers of the protected group who are as equally productive as
workers of the unprotected group experience wage differentials. Unlike taste-based discrimination,
an increase in information on the productivity of a worker results in lower wage differentials. Some
extensions of the statistical discrimination model deal with what happens as the employer’s infor-
mation on workers’ productivity changes, for example, over the course of the time or because of a
more comprehensive selection procedure. These dynamic extensions, in contrast to a static model, are
known as employer learning models. In addition, the differential observability or learnability of a
worker’s productivity between groups has been taken into account by screening discrimination models.

Aggregated data taken from the US Current Population Survey, available at http: / /www.bls.gov/cps

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
A multidisciplinary survey on discrimination analysis 593

Another strand of statistical discrimination models studies how negative rational stereotypes of
employers influence hirings and wages on one hand, and workers’ investments, for example, in
education, on the other. Lang and Lehmann (2011) call this class rational stereotyping models.

A specific labor context with an unusually good opportunity to study discrimination, is the one
of professional sports, such as baseball, basketball, football, and soccer. The problem of estimating
the productivity of workers, which is the main challenge in both theories of discrimination, is
substantially solved here by extensive, publicly available (from online sport almanacs), measures
of the performances of players and coaches. For baseball players of the major league, for example,
the number of hits, doubles, triples, home runs, stolen bases, and other similar metrics are routinely
collected. In addition, race, nationality, and salaries of players are also easily obtainable. Research has
covered discrimination in hiring, in retaining (over seasons), in segregating (to specific game roles), and
in the salaries of players, as well as customer discrimination. Customer discrimination in the context of
professional sports is also known as fan discrimination. It consists in determining whether the TV
audience, the game attendance, or the price of sport cards depend significantly on some grounds of
discrimination, such as the race of players or the racial composition of teams. Specific problems in
such approaches include determining confounding factors such as the scarcity of a player card, the
absence of personal contact between the fans and the players, and the problem of the ‘common player’
price, which is the minimum value a card can take, irrespective of the performance of the player.

Finally, note that the economic models of discrimination assume a unidirectional causal effect
of worker productivity on wages. They do not question whether a lower average productivity of a
minority group is itself a consequence of previous forms of discrimination, such as a lower
education level due to the lower income of minority group families. In other words, they do not
take into account the vicious cycle of discrimination described in Section 2.3.

4.2 Data analysis methods

In the field of labor markets, the basic question of data analysis is to test whether wages, once
controlled for the appropriate variables of workers’ productivity, are affected by sex, race, or other
grounds of discrimination. An intuitive inferential approach (see e.g. Cain, 1987; Blank ez al/.,
2004: Ch. 7) is to derive a regression model of the wage of employees that separates the dis-
crimination component of race, sex, or other characteristics of the protected group from the
productivity components of the worker. Since wage typically has a skewed distribution, the
dependent variable is often set as its logarithm. In the following linear model, for example:

log(W) = aR + BPi + --- + ByPn + @ (1)

W is the wage or salary, R is an indicator variable of race, sex, or nationality (in general, an
indicator of being in the protected group), ¢ is the residual term, and the P,’s are personal
characteristics and performance measures of workers. A ¢-test of the statistical significance of the
regression coefficients, and in particular of a, is adopted to test whether membership of the
protected group is a significant factor. Standard OLS regression is replaced, in some studies, by a
quantile regression estimation”. This is the case, for instance, of professional sports, where the log
salary distribution tends to have greater kurtosis values than standard occupations. Finally, in
order to measure the effects of equality-enforcing laws, a difference-in-differences approach,
introduced by Ashenfelter and Card (1985), is typically taken. The approach compares the
regression coefficients of the wages of the protected and unprotected groups before and after some
event, for example, a new law. See Bertrand e¢ al. (2004) for a critical presentation.

In the labor market literature, wage differentials, rather than absolute wage values, have mainly
been considered in the analyses. The classic inferential approach is the Blinder-Oaxaca decom-
position (Blinder, 1973; Oaxaca, 1973) of the mean difference in log wages of different groups

° See, for example, Koenker (2005).

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
594 A. ROMEI AND S. RUGGIERI

based on regression models in a counterfactual manner. Oaxaca starts defining a Becker dis-
crimination index as follows:
(W,,/Wy)—(Mu/My)

p= ~My] My)

where W,/W, is the ratio of the observed unprotected—protected group average wage, and M,/M,
is the ratio of their marginal products!°, which by assumption is the average wage ratio in the
absence of discrimination. In terms of logarithms, the above formula becomes

log W, —log W, = log M, —log M, + log (D + 1) (2)

The difference between the marginal products log M, —log My is the component of the wage
differentials that can be explained by the different levels of productivity of the unprotected and
protected groups, while log(D + 1) is the component due to discrimination. Using a linear regression
model of wages for a group g € {u,p} (u denotes unprotected groups, and p protected groups):

log W, = of + So ai x? + &&
i

where X;’s are productivity-determining characteristics, and the expected value of ég is 0, then
Equation (2) can be re-written as

log Wy —log Wy = Soa (X! — XP) + SO XMal — a) + (af — a)
t t

The first summation term is an estimate of the differences in productivity, namely
log M, —log My, while the second summation term is an estimate of the discrimination compo-
nent log(D + 1). Hence, discrimination exists if «/—a? ~ 0 for some i, namely if the regression
coefficients of the protected and unprotected groups differ significantly, in a statistical sense (e.g.
using the Chow’s test, see Greene, 2008). See Cotton (1988), Neumark (1988), and Oaxaca and
Ransom (1994) for refinements of the Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition, Jann (2008) for details of
its implementation in a statistical package, Bauer and Sinning (2008) and Yun (2004) for exten-
sions to nonlinear models, and Bauer and Sinning (2010) and Fairlie (2005) for extensions to logit,
probit, and tobit models.

The regression model approach is subject to three main potential biases. First, the omitted
variable bias arises when relevant control variables correlated with the group membership are not
taken into consideration in the regression model, for example, because there are no data available.
Second, the included variable bias (Killingsworth, 1993) is when some control variable is itself
affected by so-called pre-market discrimination. As an example, an indicator variable of a pre-
viously granted premium to a worker could be biased toward discrimination if the premium is
regularly granted only to workers of the unprotected group. This is an instance of the vicious cycle
of discrimination described in Section 2.3. Third, the diverting variables bias (Yinger, 1998) occurs
when the regression model includes variables that are not legitimate controls but that are corre-
lated with the protected group membership. These variables may pick up some of the effect of the
group membership variable, leading to the conclusion that there is no discrimination when in fact
there is. One example of this is the Armed Forces Qualifying Test (AFQT) score, available from
the US National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY), which is a test of cognitive skills, taken
by male adolescents. When used as a control variable, it greatly reduces the racial wage gap (Neal
& Johnson, 1996). However, there is little consensus on what AFQT measures, with possibilities
ranging from intelligence to quality of schooling, and thus as to whether it is a legitimate control.

The alternative decomposition of Juhn e¢ al. (1991) (JMP decomposition) has gained greater
popularity, since it provides a way to show the effects of omitted variables. Yun (2009) compares it
with the Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition. The survey by Altonji and Blank (1999) reports on the

10 The marginal product is the extra output produced by using one more worker.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
A multidisciplinary survey on discrimination analysis 595

use of Blinder-Oaxaca, JMP, and CLem (by Card & Lemieux, 1994, 1996) decompositions to
wage changes between groups over time. A survey of decomposition methods in economics can be
found in Fortin e¢ af. (2010).

The approaches discussed so far are based on the concept of within-qualifications discrimination,
that is, wage discrimination exists if men and women (or, in general, unprotected and protected
persons) with similar qualifications receive different wages. A challenging approach is based on
the concept of within-wages discrimination, that is, wage discrimination exists if men and women
with similar wages have different qualifications. The estimation method involves a reverse
regression of qualifications as a function of wages. We refer to Kapsalis (1982, 2010) for details on
the approach, and Schaefer and Visser (2004), Racine and Rilstone (1995), and Whiteside and
Narayanan (1989) for criticisms and a comparison with the direct regression method.

Let us now discuss in greater detail a study that tests the presence of taste-based discrimination,
while a paper regarding statistical discrimination will be discussed in Section 7.2. Charles and
Guryan (2008) collected data on racial feeling from the GSS. This includes 26 ordinal scale questions
such as ‘in general, how warm or cool do you feel towards blacks’ and ‘do you think white students
and black students should go to the same schools or separate schools?’. Data from the GSS covered a
period of 30 years and nine geographic areas, but the set of questions was not constant over the years.
The disparate prejudice responses are combined into a prejudice index as follows. First, each response
is normalized to its standard score'!. Let dk, denote the normalized response of individual i in year ¢ to
the question k. The prejudice index for 7 in year ¢ is defined by aggregating over k:

D dis 3

WE (3)
where K, is the number of questions asked in year ¢. Starting from D;,, aggregated measures of
prejudice are defined for geographic areas at year ¢. Charles and Guryan also collected data on wages
from the CPS, which is a monthly report in the United States with hourly and weekly wages,
employment and unemployment rates, and other labor market data split by residence, education,
experience, race, and other characteristics of the labor force population. The residual black-white
wage gap is estimated, for each state, by means of an OLS regression:

log(w;) = ay X; + arR; + al; + ag Sj + &}

where w; is the wage of individual i, X; is a vector of an individual’s characteristics (education,
experience, etc.), R is a black-race indicator, and T; (respectively, S,) is a vector of race-specific year
(respectively, state) variables. The az parameter then measures the contribution of being black to the
(log of) a worker’s wage. To measure how much of this contribution is taste based, that is, is due to
racial animosity, Charles and Guryan performed a second-level regression. The dependent variable is
now @p, and the dependent variables are various measures of prejudice, obtained from Equation (3) by
aggregating at the level of states. This second regression explains the black-white wage gap in a state in
terms of the prejudice indexes of that particular state. The overall results suggest that racial prejudice
accounts for as much as one-fourth of the gap in wages between blacks and whites. As predicted by
Becker’s model, regions that are more prejudiced exhibit a larger racial wage gap.

4.3 Annotated bibliography

Here, and in later subsections, we provide an annotated bibliography of survey papers and recent
advancements on the topic of the section in question.

"| The standard score of a value x for a response is (x—y)/o, where y is the mean and a is the standard

deviation of the response over the sample. To account for questions not appearing in all years, authors
deviate slightly by taking y as the mean for the year 1977, which contains almost all questions, and o is the
standard deviation for the first year the question appeared in the GSS data.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
596 A. ROMEI AND S. RUGGIERI

Surveys and comparisons. The landmark survey by Altonji and Blank (1999) on race and gender
discrimination in labor markets covers both the theoretical foundations of economic theories of
discrimination and empirical approaches to show direct evidence. In addition, it accounts for pre-
market human capital differences, such as education and family background; experience, seniority,
training, and mobility; the gender wage gap; trends in race and gender differentials; as well as the
impact of anti-discrimination policies. Earlier surveys on labor market discrimination go back to
Marshall (1974) and to Cain (1987), with the latter also covering empirical studies. A recent and
comprehensive review of theories and empirics of racial discrimination in the labor market can be
found in Lang and Lehmann (2011). A survey by Fang and Moro (2010) reviews theoretical
models of statistical discrimination and affirmative actions. The interdisciplinary economic-legal
paper by Donohue (2007) provides an overview of the connections between economic models and
empirical findings on one hand, and the US anti-discrimination laws on the other.

Charles and Guryan (2011) discuss several challenges that ‘frustrate empirical research’ on
racial labor market discrimination, including the difficulty of comparing individuals of different
races who may systematically differ in terms of some unobserved or unobservable determinants,
and the problems with the indirect testing of economic models (i.e. with testing their predictions),
rather than directly testing the mechanism assumed by the model (i.e. prejudice for taste-based
discrimination, and information limitation for statistical discrimination). Jones (2008) reviews the
literature on employment and earnings discrimination for workers with disabilities. The impact
of specific anti-discrimination policies is also evaluated. Kunze (2008) reviews data analysis
methods from the literature on empirical evidence of gender wage gaps, including OLS regression,
Blinder-Oaxaca and JMP decompositions, quantile regression. Weichselbaumer and Winter-Ebmer
(2005) conducted a meta-regression analysis of the works on gender wage differentials, where each
point of data is not an individual worker but a research study. The regression analysis is intended to
explain the wage discrimination reported in a study as a function of methodological features adopted
by the study. The data were obtained by querying the Economic Literature Index’? for any reference
to ‘(wage* or salar* or earning*) and (discrimination or differen*) and (sex or gender)’, and then
manually screening 263 empirical papers. Their results highlight how the selection of the data set under
analysis is critical. For instance, lower wage gaps are found for samples of only new entrants to the
labor market, for samples in the public sector, and for samples of high-prestige jobs.

Finally, extensive surveys on racial and ethnic discrimination analysis in professional sports can
be found in Kahn (1991b, 2000, 2009). In addition to highlighting the uniqueness of the field
and the opportunities for labor market research, Kahn’s surveys cover discrimination in hiring,
retention, segregation, salary, and consumer discrimination. Frick (2007) reviews papers on
remuneration, transfer fees, career duration, contract length, and discrimination in the major
European soccer leagues.

Static and dynamic implications of taste-based discrimination. The direct testing of the implications
of the taste-based discrimination model is difficult due to the lack of data on employers, co-
employees, or customer preferences. An influential paper by Hellerstein ez a/. (2002) tests the static
implication by relating, through an OLS regression model, firm profitability to the proportion of
female workers (here used as a proxy of employer preferences) both in low competition and high
competition markets. They also test the dynamic implication by relating firm growth to the
proportion of female workers. A recent application of the same approach, called the market test
methodology, is presented by Sano (2009), where OSL regression is compared with a mixed effect
model. Frijters et a/. (2003) sample more than 24000 observations from the UK Workplace
Employee Relations Survey, which consists of: face-to-face interviews with top management;
self-completion questionnaires by employees; and worker-representative interviews. Using job
satisfaction as the dependent variable, an ordered probit model is used to evaluate the influence of

2 http://www.aeaweb.org/econlit

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
A multidisciplinary survey on discrimination analysis 597

ethnic minority density in the workplace. The Chinese job advertising market offers a unique
opportunity to collect explicit employer preferences on the gender, age, height, and beauty of
applicants. In contrast to western countries, in fact, Chinese law allows such preferences to be
advertised. Kuhn and Shen (2010) analyze job ads through an employer search model that uses an
OLS regression of employer preferences. They found that advertising on discriminatory grounds
decreases when skill levels rise.

The dynamic implication of Becker’s model in the labor market has been investigated mainly
indirectly by analyzing the relationship between the level of competition in the product market and
employer discrimination. If wage and employment differentials decrease due to an increase in
competition, this is an indirect proof of the existence of discrimination. Data from the banking
industry have long been exploited. Black and Strahan (2001) and Levine ez a/. (2008) consider the
effects of banking deregulation on (reducing) gender and racial wage gaps, respectively, from data
from the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series’? (IPUMS), and from the US CPS survey. The
former study uses a fixed-effect method, the latter OSL and quantile regressions. The effects of
globalization on the gender wage gap have been discussed by Oostendorp (2009) and Neumayer
and de Soysa (2007). Oostendorp uses OLS regression on data from the International Labor
Organization October Inquiry'* (ILO), a survey of wages around the world, which started in 1924
and now covers 159 occupations in 49 industrial groups from more than 200 countries worldwide.
Neumayer and de Soysa adopt a negative binomial regression on data from the Cingranelli-
Richards Human Rights Dataset!*, containing standard-based quantitative information on the
government’s respect of 15 internationally recognized human rights for 195 countries, collected
annually since 1981. Along the same lines, Black and Brainerd (2004) use CPS data to study the
effect of globalization on gender discrimination in the manufacturing industry. Weichselbaumer
and Winter-Ebmer (2007) consider the effects of the adoption of equality laws on wage differ-
entials. Finally, a study on the decrease of gender discriminating employers over time is conducted
by Flabbi (2010). He uses a search model estimated on data from the CPS survey over the last
20 years. Not all the studies mentioned above confirm the prediction of Becker model’s dynamic
implication. For instance, Sano (2009) shows that, in a competitive market, companies with a
larger proportion of female employees do not necessarily perform better. He concludes that the
Japanese market is not competitive enough to eliminate taste-based discrimination. Oostendorp
(2009), in contrast with Neumayer and de Soysa (2007) and Black and Brainerd (2004), concludes
that globalization may even increase the gender gap.

Tsao and Pearlman (2010) study firm and consumer discrimination against young black physicians
using data from a survey of more than 6000 physicians. Their difference-in-differences approach
shows no strong evidence of a gender wage gap among physicians. Zhang and Dong (2008) compare
gender wages with gender productivity both in the public and private sectors of industry in China.
They use data at a firm level, so that the wage regression is based on the average wages in a firm.
Results are contrasting: in the public sector women receive a wage premium since their productivity is
lower; in the private sector, women are more productive than males, but suffer from lower wages.

Statistical discrimination and employer learning. Statistical discrimination is dependent on the
information available to an employer. A standard approach is thus to observe a shift in dis-
criminatory decisions as soon as a more complete information set is available. The seminal paper
by Altonji and Pierret (2001) first proposed an employer learning model. They experimented with
the approach on the NLSY data set, using the AFQT test as a proxy for worker’s productivity.
More recent works along this line include: Arcidiacono e¢ al. (2010); Lang and Manove (2011),
who correlate, through a median regression, the level of education across races with a worker’s ability,

1B http://www.ipums.org

14 http://laborsta.ilo.org

Is http://ciri.binghamton.edu

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
598 A. ROMEI AND S. RUGGIERI

measured by the AFQT test; Fadlon (2011), using OLS regression in extending the theoretical
model to account for employer-employee racial matches; Cheung (2010), analyzing data from the
Australian NLSY partitioned by the hiring channel!®. Finally, Wang (2010) considers the height
of immigrant workers as grounds for discrimination, and investigates whether it is used as a signal
of productivity by employers.

The speed of employers in learning about the productivity of workers was originally modeled
by Lange (2007) and estimated using the NLSY data set. Hu and Taber (2010) study asymmetric
learning models, where employers learn about the productivity of minority workers slower than
the productivity of majority workers. They use data from the biennial Displaced Workers Surveys to
relate wage losses when moving to a new job due to plant closings or to layoffs. Using again data
from the NLSY, Pinkston (2006) confirmed the hypothesis of screening discrimination that
employers are less able to evaluate the productivity of workers from one group to another. Variables
that are difficult to observe, such as the AFQT score, have a lower influence in an OLS regression
for blacks compared with white workers. Holzer et a/. (2006) aim at studying the effects of employer-
initiated criminal background checks on the hiring of African-Americans. They found that
employers who use criminal background checks are more likely to hire black applicants than
employers who do not. This confirms that less information (no criminal background check) leads to
resorting to race as a proxy of productivity. The impact of race-specific speech patterns, collected
from recorded interviews, on the employer’s understanding of speaker characteristics has also
been evaluated by Grogger (2011) through OSL and median regressions. He found that speakers
identified as black earned about 17% less than whites, after controlling for personal and ability
characteristics. A worker search model on survey data is adopted by Fryer et a/. (2011) to test racial
discrimination on search strategies and wage offers collected from unemployed workers. They
basically confirm the results reported by Lang and Manove and Arcidiacono et ai. The impact
of adopting tests in job hiring, as opposed to informal interviews, is investigated by Autor and
Scarborough (2008), and evaluated on a data set of tests submitted to retail stores. Job tests have the
equity-efficiency trade-off objective of raising the productivity of hired workers, while not reducing
opportunities for protected groups.

Salary discrimination in professional sports. There is an extensive literature on salary dis-
crimination in the context of professional sports. We cover a few recent papers adopting non-
standard tools, for older references see Kahn (1991b, 2000, 2009). Palmer and King (2006)
compute separate OLS regression models for baseball players with low, medium, and high salaries,
in order to reveal discrimination at different level of competition. They found evidence of dis-
crimination in the lower salary groups. Berri and Simmons (2009) argue that quantile regression
deals better with the skewness and kurtosis of salary distribution. They found that black football
players suffer from an entry barrier. Holmes (2011) contrasts these two types of regression on
basketball players’ data, and Frick and Deutscher (2009) compare OLS with random effects and
median regression models on German professional football data. Cornaglia and Feldman (2011)
contrast OLS with fixed effects regression models!’ in analysing the longstanding empirical
observation that married baseball players earn significantly more (10-40%) than their single
counterparts (everything else being equal). This is known as the ‘marriage premium’, and it may be
the effect of employer discrimination: married men are seen as more ‘stable’. The marriage
premium is of more general interest, since Neumark (1988) showed that it accounts for about
one-third of estimated gender-based wage differentials in the United States. A fixed effects model
was also employed by Yang and Lin (2012) to test wage discrimination against foreign players in
the National Basketball Association (NBA). Goddard and Wilson (2009) adopt a multinomial

'6 Bonoli and Hinrichs (2010) argue that the hiring channel, that is, the way job applicants contact
employers (e.g. through a friend or a relative), which is mostly considered an indicator of motivation, actually
plays a stronger role than age or gender as a signal of productivity.

'7 See e.g. Christensen (2002).

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
A multidisciplinary survey on discrimination analysis 599

probit model'® to characterize transition probabilities of English football players, and use a
GHK’® simulator to estimate regression coefficients. Black players were found to have higher
retention probabilities, suggesting a form of discrimination in career progression.

Consumer|fan discrimination. Unlike employer and co-employee discrimination, consumer discrimina-
tion cannot be eliminated by market competition, as discussed by Kahn (1991a). Evidence of a cor-
relation between the predominant race of customers and the race of the marginal hired worker has been
shown by Holzer and Ihlanfeldt (1998). The following include some recent empirical papers. Combes
et al. (2011) analyze census data of Afro-immigrant employers in France to estimate the reduction in
employment rates in jobs where workers are in contact with customers. The two-step regression model
shows that African workers have a low possibility of having a contact job in the areas where the
proportion of non-African residents is high. Coyne et a/. (2010) test an economic model of the role of
entrepreneurs in overcoming consumer discrimination using data on black players in the Major League
Baseball. The number of black players employed by a team in a year is set as the dependent variable in
a negative binomial regression. Results show that black players have a negative effect on attendance,
but a positive effect on the performance of the team. Leonard et al. (2010) use data from 800 retail
stores and 70000 employees matched to census data on the demographics of each store’s community,
measuring whether lower sales occur in stores whose workforce less closely resembles the potential
customers. They found no strong evidence of such a correlation. Ayres et al. (2005) collected survey
data from 1066 taxicab drivers on tips received by their customers. A probit regression model shows
lower tips for minority drivers and a higher stiffing (i.e. zero tip) rate. In a more recent work, Parrett
(2011) uses OLS regression on survey data to compare tips received by male and female servers in
restaurants. Discrimination emerges only from customers who rarely frequent the restaurant.

There is an extensive bibliography covering fan discrimination. Let us first consider the approach
studying sports card data. A widely cited paper by Nardinelli and Simon (1990) tests whether race
directly affects the value of a player in the market for baseball cards. They solve the common player
problem by a regression model of log P, + log P,, where P, is the price of the common player and P,
is the component of the card’s price related to player performance and race. Hispanics playing as
hitters and blacks playing as pitchers have significantly lower card prices, all the other factors being
equal. McGarrity et al. (1999) criticize the data collection methodology and the lack of accounting for
heteroscedasticity in the regression model. They propose a refined approach based on a tobit
regression from a more refined data set in which card supply is constant. Contrarily to Nardinelli and
Simon, they find only little evidence of racial discrimination. A more recent analysis of baseball sports
cards data, including a summary of related work, can be found in Primm e¢ a/. (2011). To reduce the
effect of common cards, they include only the rookie cards of players who had received at least one
vote in the baseball’s Hall of Fame (HOF) by the Baseball Writers Association of America. They
found that for non-white players, only HOF status influences the price of the card. A recent paper on
NBA sports cards can be found in Broyles and Keen (2010), who also overview the studies on NBA
data. They found no evidence of racial discrimination.

The following are some of the approaches using TV audiences or game attendance and not
covered in Kahn’s surveys. Aldrich et a/. (2005) adopt an OLS regression of the probability of
watching a football game based on the race of the players. The paper contrasts TV audience data
with GSS survey data on racial attitudes. They found strong evidence of taste for diversity in
viewers of all races. Foley and Smith (2007) and Hersch (2010) use data from baseball game
attendance. Only the former paper reports evidence of the racial discrimination of fans for the data
from the early 1990s. Finally, Wilson and Ying (2003) test consumer and co-worker nationalistic
preferences by measuring the effect of the composition of a team’s nationality on fan attendance in
the EU’s five largest football leagues. OSL regression shows that non-domestic players have a

18 See e.g. Greene (2008).
'9 Acronym of Geweke-Hajivassiliou-Keane, see Keane (1994).

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
600 A. ROMEI AND S. RUGGIERI

positive influence on club performance and fan attendance. Thus, their under-representation in
teams originates from club management.

Coleman ef al. (2008) test fan discrimination against Afro-American players using data on
votes for the Most Valuable Player competition in the NBA. Hanssen and Andersen (1999) and
Jewell e¢ al. (2002) test the same implication by using data from fans voting for baseball’s annual
All-Star Game and the HOF in Major League Baseball, respectively. Their results support the
view that discriminatory attitudes in the voting procedure have diminished over time, and may
even have reversed.

5 Observational studies II: racial profiling

This section and Section 6 cover discrimination as a profiling problem, both in the sense of
screening individuals for surveillance or scrutiny (racial profiling) and in the sense of scoring the
creditworthiness of loan applicants (credit scoring).

5.1 Approach and data collection

Profiles consist of patterns, rules, or any other form of knowledge used to screen people when
searching for those with a certain behavior. They occur in many contexts, from criminal investigations
to marketing, from genetic screening to website personalization, from fraud prevention to location-
based services. Profiling is the process of extracting profiles, either by manually eliciting them from
domain experts or by automatically inferring them from historical data using increasingly sophisti-
cated machine learning and data mining techniques. Profiling also concerns the application of profiles
to screen individuals, for example, when identifying security risks. The cross-disciplinary collection
edited by Hildebrandt and Gutwirth (2008) includes contributions on profiling groups vs. profiling
individuals, on the technical and social process of profiling, on EU legislation, on (data mining)
algorithms for profiling, on the relations between profiling and personalization and privacy, and on
profiling in specific contexts (e.g. location-based services, web navigation, employment).

Profiling becomes illegal as soon as it results in direct or indirect discrimination against protected
groups. In this section, we concentrate on racial profiling, defined as ‘the practice of subjecting citizens
to increased surveillance or scrutiny based on racial or ethnic factors rather than reasonable suspicion’
(Chan, 2011). Among the possible contexts of racial profiling (e.g. by police, airport security, or
income tax fraud investigators), vehicle stops have attracted the vast majority of research. Numerous
data collection efforts have been initiated by law enforcement agencies, often as a result of litigation or
of legislation, for the purpose of understanding the vehicle stop practices of its officers. Attributes
collected concern the stop (time, date, location, reason, duration), driver (race, gender, age), vehicle
(make, model), officer (age, gender, race, education, experience), and the outcome of the stop (e.g.
warning, citation, arrest, search, seizure of contraband). The objective of data analysis is to identify
racial patterns of disparity. Tillyer e¢ af. (2010) classify existing data analyses on the basis of whether
they deal with the initial decision to stop or with the outcome of a stop.

In initial stop studies, the actual rate of stops by driver’s race is compared with benchmark data
providing the expected rate of stops assuming no police bias exists. The difficulty of the approach
rests in identifying accurate benchmarks of the expected driver population at risk of being stop-
ped. Post-stop outcome focuses on identifying racial disparities in a specific outcome of a stop by
taking the set of stops as the reference population. An example of post-stop outcome analysis
includes checking whether the search for drugs among stopped vehicles is biased against the
driver’s race.

5.2 Data analysis methods

In the initial stop studies, comparisons between the observed data and the benchmark data simply
entail calculating the ratio of the observed number (or proportion) of stops of a racial group
over the expected number (or proportion) of people of that racial group in the benchmark data.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
A multidisciplinary survey on discrimination analysis 601

The statistical significance of the calculated ratio can be assessed by classical tests of proportions,
such as the binomial test or the Z-test. The main problem is then to determine the relevant
population, that is, the benchmark data. Engel and Calnon (2004) and Blank e¢ al. (2004: Ch. 9)
outline the strengths and limitations of six primary data sources and their use in the design of
benchmark data: census data, observations of roadway usage, official accident data, assessments
of traffic violating behavior, citizen surveys, and internal departmental comparisons. For example,
census data was used in early studies only at an aggregate level by considering the race percentages of
the total population as the standard of comparison. More refined approaches create baselines of race
percentages of the driving population detailed by age and gender even at a city block level. Engel and
Calnon (2004) also report a sample study, taken by the Pennsylvania State Police Department, in data
collection and benchmark design. Grogger and Ridgeway (2006) depart from the explicit definition of
benchmark data. They report that the capability of a police officer of observing the race of a driver
before stopping him/her decreases from daylight to darkness. Racial profiling is then tested by a
logistic regression in which the dependent variable is the probability that a black driver is stopped
given, among the independent variables, a darkness/daylight indicator.

Turning to post-stop outcomes studies, Tillyer et a/. (2010) divide the methods from the literature
into five classes. The first is multivariate analysis, which typically boils down to a regression model.
The weakness of the assumption of the independence of residuals can be mitigated by grouping
variables regarding stops and drivers, officers, and other community characteristics into a hierarchical
structure. A form of multilevel modeling ensures that the regression coefficients are not biased across
the levels of the hierarchical structure (Raudenbush and Bryk, 2002). The omitted-variables bias
problem, however, is still recognized as the main limitation of this class of methods. The second class,
called the outcome test or the hit-rate test, consists of studying the relative proportions of an outcome
across the drivers’ race assuming a condition of equilibrium. Later in this subsection, we detail the
approach of Knowles e¢ a/. (2001). The main problem with such approaches is to test whether or not
the data collected refer to a situation of equilibrium (Engel, 2008). The third class, called propensity
score’? methods, consists of matching observations that are the same for all the independent variables
except race. Intuitively, the propensity score w(x) is a weight of the distribution f() of the unprotected
group (comparison group, in statistical terminology) so that it becomes identical to the distribution of
the protected group (treatment group): f(x|protected) = w(x)f(x|unprotected). Solving for w(x), and
applying the Bayes theorem, we obtain

(x) = J (protected|x)
way = 1—f (unprotected|x)

for a constant K. After weighting the observations of the unprotected group, the only features for
which the protected and the unprotected group should differ are race and, possibly, the stop
outcome. The degree of representation of stop outcomes over races is then assessed by the dis-
crimination measures in Figure 1, calculated over the weighted observations. Propensity score
analysis is also closely linked to causal analysis (Rubin, 2005), since it aims at answering the
question ‘what kind of outcomes would we have observed had the stops involving protected
drivers involved unprotected drivers instead?’. This class is also subject to the omitted-variable
bias problem. The fourth class of methods consists of mapping stops to geography and then
performing GIS (Geographic Information Systems) analyses, such as cluster analysis, spatial
regression, comparisons with spatial layers regarding community crimes, economic and social
indicators. The fifth class of methods deals with trend analysis, as a means to visualize changes in
stop outcome rates over time. Temporal analysis techniques, such as Auto-Regressive Integrated
Moving Average (ARIMA), can be also adopted.

Let us now detail a specific approach of the outcome test class. With the aim of maximizing an
expected payoff, Knowles et a/. (2001) propose an equilibrium model in which both agents and

20 The statistical basis of propensity score weighting can be found in Rosenbaum and Rubin (1983).

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
602 A. ROMEI AND S. RUGGIERI

motorists behave strategically. The paper reports an empirical analysis on data gathered by the
Maryland State Police, consisting of 1590 observations including race, sex, year, make, model,
and date of the vehicle stopped; time, location of stop; and whether illegal drugs (specifying
the quantity) were found. We use r to denote race, and ¢ to denote other characteristics that are
potentially used by officers in the decision to search cars. Let P(G|r,c) be the probability that
a motorist of race r and characteristics ¢ carries drugs. The expected payoff of police in searching
him/her is

P(G\c, r)—t, (4)

where ¢, is the marginal cost of searching motorists of race r. Similarly, let y(c, r) be the probability
that a motorist is searched. The expected payoff of a motorist for carrying drugs is modeled as

ver(—Her)) + U-vler))v(er) (5)

where j(c,r) is the expected cost of being convicted, and v(c,r) is the expected value for carrying drugs.
If Equations (4) and (5) are non-zero, there is an incentive for police (not) to stop motorists of a
specific race and, respectively, for motorists of a race (not) to carry drugs. In a condition of equili-
brium, both Equations (4) and (5) are zero: police and motorists are willing to randomize their choices.

Racial prejudice or, in the terms of Becker’s theory, taste-based discrimination, occurs if there is
a preference to search motorists of a specific race. This is modeled by the null hypothesis that ¢, is
constant over r. Since the ¢,’s are unknown, this cannot be checked directly. The alternative,
suggested by equating Equation (4) to zero, of checking that P(G|c,r) = P(G|c) for every possible
c would require data to cover every possible context c. Knowles et a/. (2001) show that, at
equilibrium, if ¢, is constant over r, then D(r) is constant as well, where D(r) is the frequency of
being found guilty by race r, also called the hit-rate. Testing that D(r) is constant can be done by a
standard y7-test on a contingency table by summarizing the number of guilty and non-guilty
searched motorists over race. This test does not need data on any specific context c, and, as a
consequence, it does not suffer from the omitted-variable bias problem. If the null hypothesis that
t, is constant cannot be rejected, differences in the probability of search over races can be
explained as a form of statistical discrimination. Empirical results on the Maryland State Police
data set show no racial prejudice in general. When restricted to searches for large quantities of
drugs, however, white motorists are searched disproportionately compared with the probability of
being found guilty.

5.3 Annotated bibliography

Surveys and comparisons. One of the first surveys on racial profiling is by Engel et a/. (2002).
A mote recent paper by Tillyer e¢ a/. (2010) reviews initial stop and post-stop outcome approaches.
Engel (2008) reviews the outcome test approaches and critiques their main assumptions on the
behavior of police and citizens from legal and social perspectives. The adequacy of statistical analysis
of racial profiling in addressing legal issues is also discussed by Tillyer et a/. (2008). The paper reports
an interesting debate on the relative contributions and influences of data analysis and laws. Whitney
(2008) overviews statistical data collection and analysis methods in traffic stops and searches from a
legal viewpoint, arguing that strong statistical associations could be used in practice by US courts as
prima-facie evidence of discrimination. Baker and Phillipson (2011) compare the US and UK policies
in racial and religious profiling, claiming that the EU principle of (under-)proportionality is more
effective in preventing such forms of discrimination.

Initial stop approaches. Some alternative means for collecting benchmark data have been inves-
tigated. Alpert et al. (2004) propose as a reference benchmark the not-at-fault driver demographic
data from two-vehicle crashes occurred within the area of vehicle stop points. Jobard and Lévy
(2011) gathered stop data by furtively following French police officers and taking photos of the
motorists via mobile phones. The benchmark population is obtained by manually recording the

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
A multidisciplinary survey on discrimination analysis 603

characteristics of the drivers entering the place of stop observations. The odds ratio measure is
considered in the analysis of the contingency table of stopped vehicles against gender, age, and
physical appearance. Results show that police tend to over-stop young men dressed in the style
typical of youth culture. Among these, two-thirds belong to racial minorities, as estimated from
the benchmark data. Quintanar (2009) sets the benchmark population of speeders by collecting the
tickets issued by automated cameras. The proportions of women and blacks who were issued
tickets by police officers were found to be significantly higher than the benchmark. Using a data
set of stops by the New York Police Department (NYPD), Gelman e¢ a/. (2007) found that, after
controlling for population distribution and crime distribution for violent crimes and weapons
offenses, blacks and Hispanics are subject to ‘stop-and-frisk’ about twice as often as whites. To
handle variations in stop rates in cities where the percentage of blacks is high, they use three
different hierarchical Poisson regressions in which the number of stops is modeled according to the
percentage of the black population. Ridgeway and MacDonald (2009) propose an ‘internal
benchmark’ method consisting of comparing the distribution of stops of an officer with the
distribution of all the other officers. In a data set of 500000 pedestrian ‘stop-and-frisks’ made
by 3000 officers, the approach detected 15 officers who significantly stopped more blacks and
Hispanics than those predicted by the benchmark.

Post-stop outcome approaches. Regression models have been widely adopted in post-stop
approaches. See the cited surveys for extensive references. Recent approaches include Anbarci and Lee
(2008), who analyzed a data set of more than 16000 speeding tickets to test for in-group discrimination
in granting a discount on the fine to motorists of the same race as the police officer. Using data on the
Washington State Patrol, Pickerill e a/. (2009) broaden the research from a binary dependent variable
(search/no search) to a ternary variable by distinguishing the search into discretionary and mandatory
cases. Blalock et al. (2007) consider gender discrimination in issuing traffic tickets, by analysing data of
traffic stops from five locations. The first and the third cited papers report conclusions in contrast with
conventional wisdom. Anbarci and Lee revealed no same-race preferences; rather, African-American
officers are more likely to give a ‘discount’ on tickets in favor of white motorists. Blalock e¢ al. (2007)
found some evidence of gender bias only if location is included in the regression model. In addition,
men are more likely to receive tickets only in two out of five locations.

The influential paper by Knowles et a/. (2001) has been extended and criticized by several
works, as reported in the survey by Tillyer et a/. (2010). A well-known limitation of the outcome test
approach is the infra-marginality problem, namely the fact that the marginal cost t, in Equation (4)
cannot be directly observed, but only approximated via the average cost. Marginal costs can be
observed only if all the variables that officers use in taking stop decisions are known, that is, it is
reduced to the problem of the omitted-variable bias. Partial improvements of the work of Knowles
et al. (2001) in this line can be found in Anwar and Fang (2006) and Antonovics and Knight (2009).
Both papers conduct probit regression analyses on real data sets, which also contain information on the
race of the officer. Their basic idea consists of using the latter information to distinguish between taste-
based and statistical discrimination: in the presence of taste-based discrimination, the search rate is
expected to increase when the race of the officer and the race of the motorist differ. Gardner (2009)
critiques the equilibrium conditions of the approach of Knowles et a/. (2001) in the case of racially
integrated communities, which can be explained as follows. Suppose that blacks and whites obtain illegal
drugs from the same distribution networks. Any increase in stopping black motorists who purchase
drugs via such a network will deter whites from using the same network. Therefore, the marginal cost ¢,
cannot be constant over race r, even if there is no taste-based discrimination by the police.

The reference work for the propensity score approach can be found in Ridgeway (2006), who
adopts risk difference as a discrimination measure, called the race effect, and estimates propensity
scores by logistic regression on a data set of the Oakland Police Department. Results show that
black drivers suffer racial disparities both in terms of search rate and duration of the stop.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
604 A. ROMEI AND S. RUGGIERI

Related approaches. Besides vehicle stops, racial profiling has been studied, with similar analytical
techniques, in other contexts. Adopting a logistic regression model, Gabbidon e¢ a/. (2008) con-
sider consumer profiling, for example, in curtailing shoplifting. They reason on survey data
designed to determine the experience encountered by black students as victims of racial profiling.
They found racial profiling in several types of business establishments. Alesina and Ferrara (2011)
propose an outcome test model for checking racial bias in the context of capital sentencing. They
found that the probability of judicial error for minority defendants who killed white victims is
greater (about 15%) than the error for minority defendants who killed minority victims. Persico
and Todd (2005) extend the theoretical model of Knowles et a/. (2001) to the context of passenger
screening for airport security. Leopold and Meints (2008) review the profiling of employees in
automated fraud detection, including the use of intrusion detection systems, skill management
tools, and fraud prevention systems. Finally, Schreurs et a/. (2008) focus on the applicability of
non-discrimination laws to group profiling in the private sector, for example, in selecting customers for
services, offers, or discounts.

6 Observational studies III: credit and consumer markets
6.1 Approach and data collection

Discrimination in the lending process may occur at several steps, from advertising, to pre-application
enquiries, to loan approval/denial, and loan administration (Turner and Skidmore, 1999). Loan
approval or denial has received the most interest, for example, in the context of house lending, credit
granting, and mortgage lending. Among the various credit markets, mortgage lending has the most
extensive literature. The main challenge, is, in any case, the difficulty of estimating the risk of granting
a loan to an applicant on the basis of his/her financial capacity and personal characteristics.

In the United States, the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) requires a certain group of
lenders to gather census data on their mortgage applications and make it publicly available. Since
1990, the HMDA data has been integrated with the race and income of mortgage loan applicants.
One of the first relevant contributions to the collection of data was provided by researchers at the
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston in the Boston Fed Study (Munnell et al., 1996). They supple-
mented the original census HMDA data for Boston with additional information on the credit
history of more than 3000 individual applicants, including data from more than one hundred
financial institutes. This work remains crucial as no comparable dataset has since been made
available. There are a number of criticisms of the Boston Fed study (see, e.g. Longhofer and
Peters, 1999; Ross & Yinger, 2002: Ch. 5; Turner & Skidmore, 1999: Ch. 3) concerning data errors,
misclassification problems, endogenous explanatory variables and the omitted variables bias (e.g.
loan amounts and indicators of cosigner are missing).

Yezer (2010) discusses three conventional approaches of testing discrimination in loan
approval/denial decisions: mortgage rejection, mortgage pricing, and mortgage defaults.
In mortgage rejection, the disproportionate rate of rejection between racial groups of applicants is
considered prima facie evidence of discrimination. Empirical studies include the analysis of
HMDA data at the bank level (i.e. a model for each bank under analysis) or market level (i.e. a
single model aggregating variables for several banks). An experimental comparison of the two
levels of analysis was carried out by Blackburn and Vermilyea (2006). Other sources of data range
from micro-lending data to online data derived from a peer-to-peer lending site. Mortgage pricing
concentrates on a data set of approved loans, by considering whether a protected group is
systematically charged with the highest interest rates. Mortgage pricing studies cover gender and
racial discrimination in consumer credit, such as credit cards and education loans, in private firm
credit, in subprime home loans, and in household credit. Mortgage default studies assume the
probability of mortgage defaults as a measure of discrimination. If different default rates are
observed for equally creditworthy groups that differ on discrimination grounds, this is considered
prima facie evidence of discrimination.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
A multidisciplinary survey on discrimination analysis 605

The spatial clustering of neighborhoods into racially homogeneous areas very often emerges in
most cities characterized by ethnic diversity. Schelling’s segregation model (Schelling, 1971) shows
that there is a natural tendency to spatial segregation, as a collective phenomenon, even if each
individual is relatively tolerant—in his famous abstract simulation model, Schelling assumed that
a person changes residence only if <30% of the neighbors are of his/her own race. This explains
why the practice known as redlining (see Hillier, 2003 and Turner & Skidmore, 1999: Ch. 4), which
consists of denying or limiting credit on the basis of residence—drawing a red line on the border of an
urban neighborhood—is often an indirect way to discriminate on the basis of race. The case of less
credit grants is often called process-based redlining, while the case of a smaller flow of credit funds is
known as outcome-based redlining. The percentage of individuals of a protected group living in a
neighborhood is often used as a measure of the level of segregation of the neighborhood. Empirical
works combine HMDA data with census data and credit history, in order to correlate the level of
segregation of a neighborhood with its credit denial rate—all other conditions being equal.

6.2 Data analysis methods

Multivariate regression models are the basic tool for data analysis in credit and consumer dis-
crimination. As expected, the probability of rejection/approval is typically taken as the dependent
variable for mortgage rejection approaches, the interest rate of the loan for mortgage pricing
approaches, and the probability of loan default for mortgage default approaches. An advanced
approach regarding credit rejection taking into account the impact of credit history is presented
later in this subsection. A discussion of the limitations of data on mortgage defaults, including
unobserved variables and sample-selection bias, is reported in Ross and Yinger (1999). Basically, since
observed defaults occur for approved loans only, the data on default approaches is a biased sample of
loan applications, namely those the loans were granted to. If protected groups are held at a higher
standard for loan approval, the sample-selection bias is greater for protected group members, hence
their propensity to default should be lower. See Ross (1996, 1997) for more details plus a simulation
approach to evaluate the impact of sample-selection bias. In terms of the statistical model used to test
for the direct and indirect discrimination, Rachlis and Yezer (1993) summarize several criticisms
regarding the statistical significance of single-equation regression models.

In the analysis of redlining, the availability of spatial attributes, in addition to an applicant’s
personal attributes and loan characteristics, means a wide range of specialized tools can be used,
including spatial lag and spatial error regression models (LeSage & Pace, 2009), hot spot clustering
(Bailey & Gatrell, 1996), and interactive and exploratory spatial analysis (Ward & Gleditsch,
2008). Spatial attributes include aggregate values of census tracts, such as average age, average
income, number of households, and distribution/segregation of population by race, gender, and so
on. Measures of group segregation have been proposed in a large body of literature (James and
Tauber, 1985; Reardon & Firebaugh, 2002) to model group dissimilarity, isolation, and con-
centration, also taking into account the structure of social networks and social interactions
(Echenique & Fryer, 2007). A well-known social model of racial segregation motivated by pre-
ferences for neighborhood racial composition was originally proposed by Schelling (1971), and
tested by Clark (1991). Rogers and McKane (2011) present a unified mathematical framework of
Schelling’s model and its many variants.

Let us now concentrate on a specific approach in the class of credit rejection. Han (2011)
stratifies racial disparities by the length of the borrower’s credit history. The objective is to study
whether creditors get private information about borrowers (their capacity to return the loan) from
observable characteristics and the length of the creditor’s history. He follows an approach inspired
by Altonji and Pierret (2001) in which lenders play the role of employers, borrowers the role of
workers, and the credit history takes the role of the workers’ productivity. Han uses the data
collected in Munnell et a/. (1996), with a modified regression model that accounts for the length ¢
of credit history, defined as follows: «= 0 if the applicant has neither a consumer history, nor a
mortgage history; t= 1 if the applicant only has a consumer history; ¢ = 2 if the applicant has both

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
606 A. ROMEI AND S. RUGGIERI

a consumer and a mortgage history. A probit regression model is adopted, with Y= 0 denoting
loan application approval:

2
Y = S(biX + biG + y,)beai + @Hely=1 + (Bi) He + BoHn)li-2 + €
i=0

where:

e X isa vector of the characteristics of the loan (e.g. whether it is fixed-rate, the loan maturity in
years, the vacancy rate, etc.), of the applicant (e.g. age, marital status, number of the applicant’s
dependents), and of the neighborhood;

G is the racial indicator: 1 for black applicants and 0 for white applicants;

y; is a factor accounting for the length i of the applicant’s credit history;

1,-; for t=0,1,2 are indicators of the non-zero length ¢ of the applicant’s credit history;

HT, (respectively, H,,) is an indicator of payment issues in the credit history (respectively,

mortgage history), such as the 60 days delinquency in consumer credit (respectively, late
payments in mortgage history).

Note that all the coefficients vary according to the length of the credit history. To test for the
presence of taste-based discrimination, it is necessary to check whether a significant racial dis-
parity coefficient 5,; is non-zero for all credit history lengths 7= 0, 1,2. The disutility of lending to
blacks, in other words, persists irrespectively of the information on their credit history. On the
other hand, the presence of statistical discrimination can be checked by observing coefficients bg;
whose absolute value declines as i increases. Intuitively, for loan applicants with no credit history,
a lender uses the observable characteristic G, the race, as a proxy for estimating his/her private
information, thus supporting the assumption that the lack of data favors statistical discrimination.
As the length of credit history increases, the lender relies only on information on X, H,, and H,,.
Experimental analyses confirm that the importance of race in explaining loan approval decisions
decreases with the length of credit history.

6.3 Annotated bibliography

Surveys and comparisons. A critical survey of theoretical models and empirical studies since 1975
on racial disparities in mortgage-lending markets in the context of the fair housing legislation can
be found in LaCour-Little (1999). The book by Ross and Yinger (2002) is a comprehensive
discussion of the literature on mortgage discrimination in the United States. Yezer (2010) categorizes
the statistical models of mortgage discrimination into mortgage rejection, pricing, and default.
Problems with such models are discussed, including sources of bias, lack of theoretical support, and
unsatisfactory causation analysis. The collection edited by Turner and Skidmore (1999) reviews
mortgage-lending research, with chapters on issues and challenges, on pre-market discrimination, on
criticisms of the Boston Fed Study, and on redlining. Dymski (2006) summarizes the main lines of
research in credit and housing markets, covering the legal context, theoretical models, empirical studies
on redlining, mortgage and housing discrimination, small business credit market discrimination,
and the subprime ‘predatory lending’ market. Yinger (1998) is a survey of the evidence of dis-
crimination in consumer markets, including house rentals and sales, car sales, and product prices
at fast-food restaurants. Finally, Hillier (2003) and Turner and Skidmore (1999: Ch. 4) review the
main methodologies and types of data that have been investigated for redlining.

Credit rejection. This strand of the literature considers market-level models, typically by academic
studies, and lender-specific models, typically by bank regulators such as the Office of the
Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) in the United States. Blackburn and Vermilyea (2006)
compare data from eight banks and argue that market-level models produce larger estimated
racial effects. The authors also provide a brief summary of the literature. Recent approaches using
lender-specific models include Dietrich and Johannsson (2005), where logistic regression is

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
A multidisciplinary survey on discrimination analysis 607

adopted to test for age and gender discrimination on HMDA data, and Dietrich (2009), where
HMDA data from 22 banks is analyzed through an OLS regression to unveil multiple dis-
crimination on the grounds of ethnicity, race, and gender. Clarke et al. (2009) compare the
robustness of logit regression models with probit, gompit, and complementary log—log models on
data from five different banks. Evidence of discrimination is affected by both the regression
method and the data sampling approaches adopted in the analyses. Goenner (2010) observes that
different conclusions have been reached by researchers when extracting models from different
subsets of variables from the Boston Fed Study data set. He adopts a Bayesian Model Averaging
approach”! in order to average the results over a collection of models. From this, no significant
evidence of racial discrimination can be concluded in the Boston Fed data set. We also highlight
the interesting study by Pope and Sydnor (2011) on race discrimination in peer-to-peer lending,
which is an online market where individual borrowers and lenders directly engage in credit
transactions with no intermediary. Data is from a specialized website (prosper .com) where borrowers
present themselves through pictures and lenders browse loan listings. More than 110000 listings are
considered in the study, using OLS and logistic regression. Listings with a picture of a black person
were 34% less likely to get funding than those with a picture of a white person.

Indirect discrimination of credit scoring in mortgage and consumer credit has been assessed by
Avery et al. (2010), who had access to a unique data set comprising 312 credit features of 301536
individuals drawn from the records of a US national credit reporting agency. Their regression model
did not report evidence of disparate impact by race, ethnicity, or gender, and only a limited disparate
impact by age, with older individuals having lower credit scores than young people. The impact of
credit-based car insurance scores on protected groups of consumers was assessed by the Federal Trade
Commission (2007), including the use of credit scores as a proxy for race and ethnicity.

Credit pricing. Typical factors affecting the price of a loan, that is, its annual percentage rate (APR),
include: risk elements (credit risk and prepayment risk), expenses (overheads and services), loan char-
acteristics (type and channel of delivery), and negotiation factors. See Avery et al. (2005) for a more
detailed list and discussion. Higher priced loans may hide discrimination if, in addition to the afore-
mentioned factors, race or gender affect the price of loans. The in-depth study by Courchane (2007)
found that only a small percentage of APR racial differentials cannot be explained by typical factors.
Edelberg (2007) highlights a lower unexplained racial disparity in data prior to 1995, while Weller (2008)
argues that taste-based and statistical discrimination persist. Such contrasting conclusions are frequent in
the literature: they are mostly due to the use of different data sets and/or different explanatory variables
and methods. Cheng ef a/. (2011) argue that women pay higher rates because they tend to choose
recommended lenders, while men tend to search for the lowest rate. Gender discrimination in loan
amounts was also analyzed by Agier and Szafarz (2013) on a data set of 34000 loan applications to a
single microfinance institution. Evidence was found of a ‘glass ceiling’ against female entrepreneurs in
terms of loan size.

The subprime crisis in the late 2000s prompted specific studies on mortgage redlining in the
‘predatory lending’ market, even though the problem was already recognized in the early 2000s
(e.g. Calem et al., 2004). The issue here is whether minorities are less creditworthy on average than
whites, which would then justify a higher rate of subprime in minority-populated neighborhoods.
Bocian et a/. (2008), Wyly ez a/. (2008), Reid and Laderman (2009), Squires et a/. (2009), and Vicki
et al. (2009) relate race or racial segregation with high lending costs. The first two papers combine
HMDA data with a proprietary database of subprime loans. The last three papers use HMDA
data and census data to estimate neighborhood racial composition via dissimilarity and isolation
indexes. All the studies found strong evidence of racial and ethnic segregation in the subprime
market. Ding et a/. (2008) adopt multivariate regression on HDMA data of a large US city,
suggesting that the role of funding by government agencies, such as the Federal Housing

21 See Hoeting et al. (1999) for an introduction.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
608 A. ROMEI AND S. RUGGIERI

Administration should be expanded. Rugh and Massey (2010) analyze data in order to isolate
subprime lending as the causal mechanism through which segregation influenced foreclosure. They
adopt a two-stage OLS regression model on data obtained from RealtyTrac, the largest provider
of foreclosure listings in the United States. Finally, an interdisciplinary economic-social science
study of the emergence of the subprime crisis can be found in Dymski et a/. (2011).

Credit default. Credit default consists of estimating the probability of the default of an applicant
on the basis of his/her financial capacity, of the risk of the local market, the loan terms, and the
applicant’s personal characteristics—including race, gender, and other discrimination grounds.
If discrimination exists, protected groups should have lower default rates than non-protected ones.
Berkovec ez al. (1994) adopt a linear regression model on a data set of mortgages insured by the
US Federal Housing Administration. A higher likelihood of default for black householders was
found, which then justifies higher credit denial or interest rates. A refined study, accounting for the
market concentration of lenders, is reported by Berkovec et a/. (1998). The recent paper by Brown and
Simpson (2010) reviews the role of default rates in mortgage discrimination research, and conducts a
simulation analysis to compare the performance of reverse regression (used by LaCour-Little (1996))
vs. the commonly adopted logit regression models. The latter methodology outperforms reverse
regression. Finally, Chan e¢ af. (2011) relate the 90-day mortgage default rate available in HDMA data
to neighborhood characteristics, hence highlighting possible sources of redlining.

Credit discrimination at firm-level. Blanchflower et al. (2003) compare the credit rejection of black-
owned and white-owned small businesses. The paper deals with data from the US National
Surveys of Small Business Finances, finding that the probability of having the credit denied for a
black owner is twice that of a white owner. The same source of data is also used in Cavalluzzo
et al. (2002), Blanchard e¢ al. (2008), and Asiedu e¢ al. (2012), in analysing gender, race and
ethnic discrimination against small business owners. Muravyev et a/. (2009) consider gender using
cross-national data from the Business Environment and Enterprise Performance Survey, an estab-
lishment-level survey which since 1999 has been conducted by the European Bank for Reconstruction
and Development and the World Bank. Many of the aforementioned studies cover both loan-denial
decisions (using probit regression) and differences in the interest rate charged (using OLS regression).
Data include control variables on credit history and the financial health of the firm. Blanchard et al.
(2008) also discuss an approach to differentiate between taste-based and statistical discrimination by
identifying variables that might be associated with lender prejudice. Alesina e¢ al. (2008) and Albareto
and Mistrulli (2011) adopt probit regression to investigate whether micro firms (i.e. sole proprietor-
ship) run by migrants or women pay more for credit than firms run by native or male entrepreneurs.
They had access to unique data sets from the Central Credit Register run by the Bank of Italy. Fraser
(2009) considers the small business credit market, using probit regression on data from the UK Survey
of SME Finances. With the exception of Blanchard et ai. (2008), the research confirms the presence of
gender discrimination in firms, in terms of higher interest rates (in Italy, Alesina et a/. (2008)), of
restrictions in funding start-up companies (in Europe, Muravyev et al., (2009)), and for small firms in
terms of a market concentration (in United States, Cavalluzzo et al. (2002)).

Redlining. ‘The Color of Money’ is a famous series of newspaper articles” highlighting the issues of
redlining. Updates and extensions of the original study are reported by Holloway and Wyly (2001).
Outcome-based redlining considers the supply of mortgage credit to a neighborhood as the
dependent variable, normalized by the ratio of loan requests over the number of residential
properties in the neighborhood. An early survey of outcome-based redlining can be found in Schill
and Wachter (1993). Phillips-Patrick and Rossi (1996) highlight that using regression models on
data aggregated at the level of neighborhoods may lead to inconclusive and misleading results.

22 http://powerreporting.com/color

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
A multidisciplinary survey on discrimination analysis 609

Process-based redlining concentrates on the probability of credit denial in minority neighbor-
hoods compared with majority neighborhoods. Approaches using the Boston Fed Study data
include Hunter and Walker (1996), Tootell (1996), and, more recently, Ross and Tootell (2004).
The second and the third papers highlight indirect forms of redlining, such as the practice of
forcing applicants of a minority neighborhood to buy private mortgage insurance. The socio-
logical implications of insurance redlining are discussed by Squires (2003). One particular line of
research has tested the theory, originally proposed by Lang and Nakamura (1993), which assumes
the number of recent sales in a neighborhood as an ‘information externality’ able to affect loan
decision outcomes. Blackburn and Vermilyea (2007) was the first empirical paper in these lines.
A logistic regression on HDMA and census data shows that, after controlling for information
externality, the percentage of racial minorities in a neighborhood positively affects the decision
outcome in an area. Blank et al. (2005) report three types of analyses: a dissimilarity index of a
census tract, comparing the expected approval rate against the observed one; a three-way cross-
tabulation approach; and a logistic regression. Structured interviews with bank officers were used
to complement the study. All methodologies support the evidence of discrimination against blacks
and Hispanics in housing and mortgage-lending markets. Turning to other forms of credit,
Campbell et a/. (2008) use a logit regression on observations from a single bank on unsecured
consumer loans, arguing that, due to the lack of collateral, they are more prone to discriminatory
decisions compared to mortgages. Cohen-Cole (2009) and Brevoort (2011) link location-based
information on race with individual credit files, using a proprietary data set of credit histories from
a major credit bureau. The former paper finds redlining practises against minority neighborhoods.
The latter paper, however, shows that such results are largely due to omitted variables and data
sampling bias.

Interesting case studies involving the use of descriptive statistics, GIS mapping, multivariate
regression, or generalized linear mixed modeling are reported by Silverman (2005, 2008),
Hernandez (2009), Kuebler (2012), and Zonta (2012). All of them integrate HMDA data with
census data. While the first four papers found a significant correlation of negative decisions with
race and/or ethnicity, the latter shows that disparities in lending outcome are affected by edu-
cation, neighborhood socioeconomic distress, residential stability, and the age of neighborhood
housing stock, but not by race. The case study by Aalbers (2007) found a positive correlation
between redlining and low income, unemployment, and ethnicity. Aalbers adopts discriminant
analysis for correlation, using Wilks’ A-test of significance, and hierarchical and k-means cluster
analysis to detect outlier neighborhoods. Finally, a probit regression is adopted by Ezeala-
Harrison et al. (2008) on a data set of micro-data of house loans. They found that minorities have
great difficulties in accessing credit for housing in white neighborhoods, while this is not the case
in black neighborhoods.

Discrimination in consumer markets. The practice of a retailer, wholesaler, or manufacturer selling
the same product, with the same marginal cost, at different prices based on a buyer’s willingness to
pay is known as price discrimination (Armstrong, 2006). Price discrimination is not considered part
of the economics of discrimination: while it is rare nowadays for black consumers to pay a higher
price for the same quantity of items, this certainly occurred in the past in Jim Crow law states in
the United States. Nevertheless, discrimination in specific consumer markets has been considered
in the past. Differential treatment in pricing in the car sale market was investigated using
regression analysis of US nation-wide data (Goldberg, 1996). Legal issues of profiling customers
and consumers for automated individual recommendations/promotions in marketing campaigns,
possibly resulting in differential treatment, are discussed by K6rffer and Meints (2008). The
disparate treatment of the US Harmonized Tariff Schedules on imported goods for women is
discussed in Bertero (2011). Finally, Bayer et a/. (2012) analyze a large data set of proprietary
transactions, with a rich set of features on prices, on buyer’s and seller’s characteristics, and on
houses. Their regression model shows that black and Hispanic buyers pay a premium of about
3% compared with white buyers.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
610 A. ROMEI AND S. RUGGIERI

7 Observational studies IV: other contexts

This section surveys a few other contexts where observational techniques of discrimination ana-
lysis have been applied. We cover gender bias in academia, discrimination in health care, and in
social interactions.

7.1 Gender bias in academic grants

The problem of gender differences in research is of concern to all major funding institutions. The
EU regularly publishes a report on the status of gender funding in the member states (European
Commission, 2009), and it promotes gender equality in scientific research??. EU legislation
includes an explicit resolution on women and science (Council of the EU, 1999), which notably
preceded the resolutions on racial and employment equality. The National Science Foundation
(NSF) in the United States supports the development of systemic approaches to increase the
representation and advancement of women in academic science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics through the ADVANCE program™*. Broader overviews of studies and findings on
gender in (scientific and technological) research have been conducted by the European Commission
(2012) and by UNESCO (2007).

Forms of gender discrimination may explain women’s under-representation in academia, both
past and present. The surveys by Bentley and Adamson (2003) and Ceci and Williams (2011) cover
multidisciplinary literature on gender differences in manuscript reviewing, grant funding, uni-
versity admission, and hiring and promoting in research.

The influential paper by Wenneras and Wold (1997) reports a study on post-doctoral fellowship
applications to the Swedish Medical Research Council (MRC) in 1995. A total of 62 applications
were submitted by men and 52 by women: 16 men were funded (25.8%) vs. four women (7.7%).
Applicant’s sex and scientific competence are considered as independent variables in a linear
regression model estimating the score assigned by the reviewers. Scientific competence as a control
factor is measured in terms of the number of published journal articles, their citation count, and
total impact of those journals. The regression shows that ‘a female applicant had to be 2.5 times
more productive than the average male applicant to receive the same score’. However, subsequent
studies by several funding societies in Europe and North America fail to show evidence of sex bias
in approval rates (Ceci and Williams, 2011). In fact, Sandstr6m and HiAllsten (2008) analyzed data
on applications to the MRC in 2004 and found a reversed gender bias, namely a small but
significant effect in favor of funding women’s grants compared with men with the same scientific
competence score.

RAND (2005) investigates grant applications in the period 2001-2003 to the NSF, the National
Institutes of Health (NIH), and the Department of Agriculture. No evidence of gender bias was
generally found after controlling for age, academic degree, institution, grant type, institute, and
application year. There were two exceptions, partly explainable by the lack of further control
variables. First, women received only 63% of the amount of funding awarded to men by the NIH.
Second, women who applied in 2001 were less likely than men to submit applications in the next 2
years. Wilson (2004) explains the lower amount of funding granted to women by their margin-
alization within the scientific community, by their segregation to lower rank positions, and by
their smaller social networks—all of these factors affecting their chances of funding possibilities.

Ley and Hamilton (2008) highlight that, while there is now generally gender equality between
students and instructors, there is still a striking drop in the roles of assistant professors and
professors—that is, a glass ceiling in science. The authors analyzed more than 100 thousand
applications between 1996 and 2007 to NIH grant programs to determine whether gender differences
occur at some stage of a researcher’s career, which may explain the observed attrition. While they

23 http: //www.yellowwindow.be/genderinresearch

24 http://www.portal.advance.vt.edu

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
A multidisciplinary survey on discrimination analysis 611

found a decrease in female applicants for grants throughout a researcher’s career, there is substantial
equity of the rates of funded applications between males and females at all stages of the process.

Marsh e¢ al. (2008) summarize the major findings of an 8-year research program on the analysis
of peer reviews in grant applications to the Australian Research Council. Their data set includes
2331 proposals rated by 6233 external assessors, out of a total of 10023 reviews. They consider
issues such as: reliability of reviews, in the sense of an agreement of reviewers across individual
proposals and across disciplines; trustworthiness of reviewers nominated by applicants; bias of
national reviewers, who give more favorable evaluations than international ones; the positive
influence of academic rank, in the sense that professors are more likely to be funded due to their
experience and successful research track records; and the positive influence of the prestige of the
university affiliation and of the applicant’s age. They also consider the influence of an applicant’s
gender, finding that 15.2% of funded applications were led by females, which was exactly the same
percentage as female applicants. Once again, although women are under-represented in the
applications pool, they are equally represented in the funded pool.

Regarding the analytical methodology, research on peer review studies has carried out statis-
tical analyses mainly by means of variants of regression, correlation, Z-tests of proportions,
and more rarely by analysis of variance and discriminant function analysis. Multistage peer
reviews have been also analyzed with latent Markov models (Bornmann et a/., 2008). Multilevel
regression”, adopted by Jayasinghe er al. (2003) and Mutz et al. (2012), includes a subject level
random variable modeling variation in a cluster of data. For instance, Jayasinghe et al. (2003)
adopt multilevel regression to take into account correlations in the cluster of ratings of a reviewer,
and in the cluster of ratings in the same field of study. Another interesting methodology is meta-
analysis, the objective of which is to detect which conditions (e.g. application type, research area,
country, etc.) affect the ratio of success between women and men. Bornmann et ai. (2007) collected
data from 66 peer-reviewed procedures, and, using generalized regression models, concluded that
there were overall robust gender differences, with men having greater odds of approval than
women by about 7%, after controlling for discipline, funding agencies, and year. The subsequent
study by Marsh (2009), using multilevel regression, revised the conclusion for research grant
applications, but it remained the same for fellowship applications.

7.2 Discrimination in health care

The labor market models of statistical and screening discrimination have been studied in the
context of health care. ‘Expert’ patients are shown to receive different treatment, for example
obstetricians, midwives and doctors have a higher rate of Cesarean sections than other patients.
Grytten et al. (2011) analyze the Norway Medical Birth Registry data, consisting of about 2.5
million records, using logit regression. Their results support a form of screening discrimination,
where expert patients exhibit better communication with doctors. Chandra and Staiger (2010) and
Anwar and Fang (2011) differentiate taste-based and statistical discrimination in a data set of
heart attack treatments and of emergency ward operations, respectively. Mcguire e¢ al. (2008) test
racial and ethnicity discrimination in the treatment of depression using survey data. Finally, Green
et al. (2007) use implicit association tests to measure the implicit bias of physicians in treating
thrombolysis in black vs. white patients. Black patients are unconsciously perceived as less
cooperative. Implicit association tests*® assess unconscious preferences by measuring the time it
takes subjects to match representatives of social groups to particular attributes (e.g. good, bad,
cooperative, and stubborn). A recent review on racial and ethnic discrimination in health care is
reported by Shavers e¢ al. (2012).

Let us now turn to discuss in more detail an interesting paper by Balsa e¢ a/. (2005) on statistical
discrimination models in health care. They carried out an empirical study of the disparities

2°" See Goldstein (2011)

26 https://implicit.harvard.edu/implicit

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
612 A. ROMEI AND S. RUGGIERI

originating in clinical encounters, where statistical discrimination is interpreted as the ‘rational
application of probabilistic decision rules when uncertainty surrounds the doctor’s estimate of a
patient’s health status’. Prior experience may induce a doctor to take into account race or ethnicity
as a factor in clinical decisions, for example, because a given symptom is more predictive of
a certain disease in a racial group compared with other groups. Data were collected from a
medical observational study covering 11 664 patients on depression, hypertension, and diabetes.
Complementary data from national surveys was used to estimate the prevalence of diseases and
risk factors nationwide, which represents doctors’ prior knowledge. The authors first consider a
‘traditional disparities’ probit model:

Pr(diagnosis) = ®(6,S + d).R + BX + nY) (6)

where the probability of a certain diagnosis is estimated from indicators (0/1 values) of patient
symptoms (S$), minority race (R), other characteristics of the patient (X), and the doctor’s char-
acteristics (Y). A negative and significant 6 is usually claimed as evidence of discrimination. However,
nothing can be concluded on the reasons for such a disparate treatment, for example whether it is due
to racial prejudice or to prior knowledge. The model is then augmented as follows:

Pr( diagnosis) = O(6,S + 6.R + 6386 + 640 + dsRS + BX + HY) (7)

to take into account the prior knowledge @ (prevalence of the disease among similar individuals),
and the joint effects of race and symptoms (modeled by the product of indicators RS) and of
symptoms and prior knowledge (S@). A Bayesian information criterion is adopted to test which
model best fits the data. For instance, Equation (7) performs better than Equation (6) for
hypertension diagnoses—hence the contribution of prior knowledge is significant. A decrease in
absolute value of the regression coefficient 6, of the race indicator R from Equations (6) to (7)
measures the extent to which prior knowledge explains the disparate treatment, hence, the extent
of statistical discrimination. For hypertension, the decrease is 75%. Finally, the coefficient 55
enables miscommunication problems (i.e. screening discrimination) to be tested between doctors
and minority patients. In fact, a negative and significant 6; means that the way doctors perceive a
signal of disease depends on the racial group of the patient.

However, the possibly discriminatory nature of the prior knowledge 6@ is not discussed in the
paper. If past diagnoses were biased due to existing ‘background’ discrimination, then @ is itself
affected by discrimination. Thus, Equation (7) performs better than Equation (6) as a consequence
of the included-variable bias. Rather than being an explanatory variable, prior knowledge has the
effect of perpetuating the vicious cycle of discrimination described in Section 2.3.

7.3 Social interactions

In the labor market, social interactions refer to forms of externalities not regulated by the price
mechanism, in which actions of a reference group affect an individual’s preferences (see
Scheinkman (2008) for a theoretical and historical perspective, and Ioannides (2008) for an
empirical perspective). The social multiplier is a ratio measure of the effects on the average action
of individuals with or without the influence of their peers. In the context of discrimination in labor
economics, Montgomery (1991, 1994) first modeled job searches through off-line social networks,
assuming ties between workers and employers that satisfy a binomial probability distribution. In
equilibrium, wages are determined not by workers’ actual skills but by the number of social ties
they hold. As a consequence, if white workers have a better network, they have an advantage over
equally productive black workers. A richer network structure is assumed in the work by Calvo-
Armengol and Jackson (2004), yet the underlying economic model adopted is simpler. van der Leij
et al. (2009) analyze data from the US Social Capital Benchmark Survey 2000 and from the
Estonian Labor Force Survey, claiming that social network segregation, rather than discrimina-
tion, explains the racial wage gap. Inter-ethnic communication is estimated by aggregate telephone

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
A multidisciplinary survey on discrimination analysis 613

call data between geographical regions. Ioannides and Loury (2004) survey the economic literature
on job information networks, social interactions, and wage inequalities. More recent models of job
inequality explained by the structure of social networks can be found in Calvo-Armengol and
Jackson (2007) and Kim (2009).

Beyond the labor market research, social interactions can provide a fertile ground for the
emerging area of social network analysis. We believe that extending concepts and methods to the
analysis of discrimination and segregation in large online social networks is a promising direction
for future research. An example of the potential of such approaches is the work of Stephens-
Davidowitz (2012), who used the number of Google search queries with racially charged terms as a
proxy to estimate racial animosity towards Barack Obama in the 2008 presidential elections.

8 Quasi-experimental studies

This and the following section are concerned with quasi-experimental and experimental approa-
ches to data collection and analysis, as a means to overcome the limitations of observational data
in controlling the factors which may affect a decision.

8.1 Approach and data collection

Auditing, also known as field experiments, follows a quasi-experimental approach to investigate
the presence of discrimination by controlling some of the factors that may influence decision
outcomes. It consists of using pairs of testers, also called auditors, who have been matched to be
similar on all characteristics that may influence the outcome except race, gender, or other grounds
of possible discrimination. The tester pairs are then sent into one or more situations in which
discrimination is suspected, for example renting an apartment or applying for a job, and the
decision outcome is recorded. The difference in outcomes between the paired groups then provides
a measure of discrimination. This is a quasi-experimental approach since some factors are not
controlled by the researcher, for example the environment of a job selection procedure or the
presence of other applicants.

Situation-testing occurs as a special case of auditing when the testers come into contact with the
decision maker. This is the case, for instance, of job interviews involving human testers, who are
selected and trained in advance to act in a similar way to each other. The strong point in favor of
situation-testing is that testers can record the cause of discrimination, such as prejudice or ste-
reotypes, hence allowing for a causal analysis of the discrimination cases. The main limitation
of situation-testing is the cost of data collection. A sufficiently large number of audits needed
to produce statistically significant results is expensive. In addition, situation-testing cannot be
applied at all in some contexts, for example in wage increases, or in the disparate application of
contractual terms (e.g. in house lending, see Roscigno et al. (2009)). Moreover, audit studies are
typically not available in a time series, which is a pre-requisite for analysing changes over time.

In correspondence-testing, the data scarcity problem is mitigated by designing paired ad hoc fake
resumes or application forms to be sent to advertised vacancies. In a landmark study, Bertrand
and Mullainathan (2004) prepared a collection of 5000 resumes from standard templates, which
they randomly assigned to either a typical white American name (e.g. Emily or Greg) or an
African-American sounding name (e.g. Lakisha and Jamal). Resumes were sent to newspaper
help-wanted ads in Chicago and Boston, and the invitation to interview was taken as the decision
outcome of the experiment. Resumes with white-sounding names had a 10.08% chance of
receiving a callback, while equivalent resumes with African-American sounding names had a
6.70% chance of being called back. In addition, higher quality resumes elicited 30% more call-
backs for white-sounding names and only 9% more for African-American sounding name. The
absence of personal contact between the decision maker and the testers represents the main
criticism against the correspondence-testing approach. Larger opportunities for data collection are
offered by Internet job advertisement services, known as e-recruiting, which enable automated

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
614 A. ROMEI AND S. RUGGIERI

 

 

unprotected group
protected group benefit denied _ benefit granted
benefit denied a b
benefit granted c d
n

 

 

GR=b6/n NR=(b-—c)/n

Figure 3. Fourfold contingency table and discrimination measures for audit studies

searches for job position adverts in large databases, and automated submission and notification of
applications. In addition, contexts other than employment can be covered, such as discrimination
in product advertising in internet marketing.

8.2 Data analysis methods

The surveys by Yinger (1998), Riach and Rich (2002), and Bendick (2007) assume the net rate of
discrimination as a measure of discrimination in audit studies. Consider Figure 3. Each cell in the
fourfold contingency table reports the number of paired audits satisfying the cell coordinates. is
the total number of audits. Two measures are defined on the contingency table: the gross rate of
discrimination GR, defined as the share of audits in which the auditor of the protected group is
treated less favorably than his or her teammate; and the net rate of discrimination NR, defined as
the gross rate minus the share of audits in which the auditor of the protected group is treated more
favorably than his or her teammate.

Another example of data analysis is the internet-based auditing approach of Nunley e¢ al.
(2011). In the context of eBay auctions, they test the presence of in-group racial discrimination,
which occurs when individuals prefer to interact with people of their own racial group. Their
experiment defines two groups of fictitious users, say whites and blacks, and a set of low-price
items. The race of bidders, which is unknown, is inferred by splitting the set of products into two
groups for which the relative racial compositions of the bidders is likely to differ. For each product
of both groups, two different seller accounts are opened choosing a typical ‘white’ name (e.g. Jake
or Dustin) and a typical ‘black’ name (e.g. Tyrone or Jamal). Each seller uses a similar picture and
description of the product. The experiment consisted of 288 auctions over a period of 11 months.
Auctions lasted 5 days and began with an initial price of one cent. To prevent buyers recognizing
that the two accounts were from the same source, an auction for a given pair began 2 days prior to
the other, and this delay was alternated between black and white sellers. The price received by a
product from a prospect buyer is modeled by an OLS regression:

P=fPo+P\R+PE+ BY + fyW +e (8)

where P is the price received, R is an indicator denoting whether the seller’s and buyer’s race
match, £ indicates whether the auction was the first or the last in its pair, Y is a boolean denoting
whether the seller has a good rating (a yellow star, namely 10 positive feedbacks from past buyers),
W captures other determinants of the price dependent on the selling period and the product type,
and ¢ is the residual term. The OLS regression model is estimated for sub-samples of low/high
competition products, for different levels of seller feedback, and for predominantly white and
black products. The level of competition for a product is measured by the number of possible
auctions for similar products on eBay in the same time period. A positive value for B; in Equation
(8) is an indication of in-group discrimination, and it turns out to be higher for low competitive
markets and for low seller ratings, which is in line with the economic models of discrimination. For
instance, the mean price paid for a product is $6.37 if a seller’s race and buyer’s race match, and
$5.93 otherwise.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
A multidisciplinary survey on discrimination analysis 615

8.3 Annotated bibliography

Surveys and comparisons. Bendick (2007) reviews more than 30 situation-testing studies in
employment discrimination in the United States. The net rate of discrimination in these studies
ranges from 2% to 38% when comparing Afro-American to European-American testers, from
12% to 25% when comparing Hispanic to Anglo named auditors’, from 8% to 40% when
comparing females with males, and from 17% to 41% when comparing older and younger
auditors. Rorive (2009) covers the use of situation-testing in the EU member states. Another
summary of recent audit studies in employment discrimination can be found in Pager (2007), also
including an interesting appendix on the design and implementation of a generic situation-testing
study. Riach and Rich (2002) review and compare the statistical significance of field experiments
on racial, sex, and disability discrimination in employment, and on discrimination in housing sales
and rentals. The collection edited by Fix and Tuner (1999) covers the use of auditing to measure
racial discrimination in housing, employment, commercial transactions, and business. Criticisms
of the conclusions drawn from audit methods are discussed by Heckman and Siegelman (1993)
and Heckman (1998), while Riach and Rich (2004) comment on the ethical implications of such
methods. Quillian (2006) discusses how the measurement of discrimination through audit methods
should incorporate psychological theories of prejudice.

Situation-testing. Pager and Quillian (2005) show that blind-methods, that is, experiments with
information (partly) hidden from the participants, are essential in gathering trustworthy data.
They found that employers who indicated a greater likelihood of hiring ex-offenders in a (non-
blind) survey were no more likely than other employers to hire an ex-offender in a (blind) audit
study. In order to overcome problems related to the selection and training (e.g. motivation,
fairness, unbiased behavior) of auditors, Moreno et a/. (2004) select auditors from real job seekers
retrieved from a job intermediation agency database. Massey and Lundy (2001) correlate speech
patterns with racial discrimination in housing by conducting audits through telephone calls with
speakers exhibiting a ‘black sounding’ or a ‘white sounding’ accent. They found that black women
face higher fees and a higher probability of being refused a rental.

Bendick et a/. (2010) analyze the racial discrimination of restaurant employers from two per-
spectives. From an observational perspective, regression analysis over census data reveals no
adverse impact over race, gender, and nationality on earnings after controlling for workers’
education and experience. However, applied to a specific sector, namely fine dine establishments, a
situation-testing perspective reveals a high wage gap for these groups. Pager ef al. (2009) study
low-wage labor markets by analysing situation-testing data through a hierarchical logistic
regression accounting for a random effect for each employer by capturing correlations between
observations of the same employer?®. Their results show that black applicants are half as likely as
equally qualified white applicants to receive a callback or job offer.

Paired tests were extensively conducted in the US House Discrimination Survey, the results of
which are reviewed by Turner ef a/. (2002) and Turner and Ross (2005). Differential treatment
in pricing car sales has been investigated using audit studies since the 1990s (Ayres & Siegelman,
1995). Siegelman (1999) summarizes approaches and legal cases using auditing in public
accommodation and in consumer markets discrimination such as in car rentals, shopping,
taxicab stops, and home repairs. In the context of consumer services, Myers ef a/. (2010) deal
with the unequal treatment of female customers in coffee shops in terms of time-to-be-served,
rather than the cost of the service. The differential treatment is found to increase with the
proportion of male waiters.

27 Bendick (2007) reports a single ‘outlier’ study, whose methodology and rigor have been seriously ques-
tioned, which found a net rate of —10%, denoting a better treatment of the Hispanic testers compared to their
counterparts.

28 The statistical basis of the approach can be found in Ghosh et al. (2000).

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
616 A. ROMEI AND S. RUGGIERI

Correspondence-testing. Experiments in the line with Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004) have been
recently conducted by Banerjee et a/. (2009), who sent fictitious resumes in response to job
openings to test for discrimination against caste and religious groups in India; and by Kaas and
Manger (2012), who sent applications to student internship advertisements to test for dis-
crimination against immigrant students. Banerjee et a/. (2009) found no significant differences in
the callback rates, while Kaas and Manger (2012) found that German-sounding names compared
with Turkish-sounding names raise the average probability of a callback by about 14%. Neumark
(2010) proposes a statistical test to evaluate whether the data collected in an audit study shows
biased racial discrimination due to the fact that applicants from different groups exhibit different
variances in their characteristics, yet having the same average values. They use the same data as
Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004). Other grounds of discrimination covered by correspondence-
testing in job applications include sex (Riach & Rich, 2006; Booth & Leigh, 2010), obesity, and
physical appearance (Rooth, 2009; Boo e¢ a/., 2012), sexual orientation (Drydakis, 2009), ethnicity
(McGinnity et a/., 2009; Carlsson and Eriksson, 2012), or a combination of these (Patacchini et al.,
2012). For grounds not related to the name of an applicant (e.g. obesity or sexual orientation), the
authors add a manipulated portrait photo to the fake CV or an explicit reference to well-known
homosexual communities. Most of the cited works adopt statistical regression for the data ana-
lysis. Results reveal preferences for women in several types of jobs, such as trainee chartered
accountants and secretaries. However, Booth & Leigh (2010) observe that this occurs only for jobs
where the percentage of females is already >80%—thus highlighting a form of occupational
segregation. Other findings include a negative bias in Europe against gay men (Drydakis, 2009),
yet not against gay women (Patacchini et a/., 2012), and a positive bias, known as the ‘beauty
premium’, in favor of attractive females in low-skilled jobs (Patacchini et a/., 2012).

In addition to recording the outcome of job applications, Carlsson and Rooth (2007) also
conduct interviews with employers who invited at least one applicant, in order to gather infor-
mation on the gender and ethnicity of the recruiter and on the characteristics of the employer’s
company, with the intended objective of extracting a meaningful classification of discriminatory as
opposed to non-discriminatory companies. They found a greater negative bias in small firms and
for low-skilled occupations. Arai et a/. (2008) extend the same experiment to a two-stage corre-
spondence test. In the first stage, employers receive CVs of an equally observable quality between
the two groups of applicants. In the second stage, CVs of the protected group have an advantage
of 2 years’ experience. The aim is to study the degree of reduction in discrimination. Results show
that differences in callbacks disappear at the second stage for females, while remaining for males
belonging to an ethic minority. Linear regression models are adopted in estimating callback
probabilities. A similar approach is conducted by Zussman (2012) in analyzing 384 fictitious ads
for used vehicles, distinguished by typical Arab and Jewish names. In the follow-up experiment,
potential buyers who responded to the ads are contacted to participate in a survey measuring their
racial attitudes. Finally, a variant of correspondence-testing has been adopted in order to assess
gender discrimination in schools. Hinnerich et a/. (2011) compare grades assigned to a written test
by teachers who knew (non-blind test) or did not know (blind test) student names. The study
found no differences in grading between male and female students in both non-blind and blind
test evaluations.

Internet-based testing. Correspondence-testing can be applied in-the-large by resorting to data
crawled from the Internet. One example is Booth e¢ a/. (2010), who tackle the critical issue of
writing CVs starting from templates and real CVs crawled from the Web. They submitted more
than 4000 fictional applications for entry-level jobs to an online e-recruiting web site. The
applicant’s name was set as an indicator of ethnicity, sex, or both. The authors report a ratio of
callback rates of Anglo-Saxon sounding names over minority (e.g. indigenous, Italian, Chinese)
names ranging from 1.12 to 1.64. For male applicants, the ratio ranges from 1.21 to 1.76; for
females, from 1.03 to 1.82. Another recent example includes Ahmed ef al. (2013), who code
homosexuality by stating that an applicant lives with a partner of the same sex. The synthetic

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
A multidisciplinary survey on discrimination analysis 617

generation of resumes is discussed by Lahey and Beasley (2009), who designed a parametric tool to
mitigate the bias due to the limited number of (template) CVs that can be generated manually. The
legal implications of possible discrimination in e-recruiting, compared with classical means of
recruiting, are discussed by Hogler et a/. (1998). Eriksson and Lagerstrom (2012) on the other
hand, use an Internet database of job applications where job seekers can choose whether or not to
reveal sex and ethnicity. From a sample of 18000 real job seekers in Sweden, the callback rate is
calculated for the full sample or for blind observations only. A Poisson model is adopted to
estimate the number of contacts. They found no evidence of ethnic discrimination and only a little
evidence of gender discrimination.

The impact of a seller’s race in online auctions is investigated by Doleac and Stein (2010). They
consider iPod ads posted through local online classified advertisements featuring a photograph of
the product held by a black hand, a white hand, or a tattooed hand. Discrimination on the grounds
of race and of a tattoo was found. Similar to Nunley ef a/. (2011), they use the number of competing
sellers as a measure of market competition. The disparities disappear in competitive markets. The
quality of reactions from potential buyers (categorized through good/bad e-mails) is also analyzed.
Results do not vary w.r.t. the quality of the e-mails. Regarding the analytical methods, they adopt
several regression models, including negative binomial regression, probit, and OLS.

Discrimination in online rental housing is investigated by Ahmed and Hammarstedt (2008).
Fictitious e-mails with ethnic and gender sounding names are sent in response to house rental ads.
To distinguish between taste-based and statistical discrimination, Bosch et a/. (2010) prepared two
types of e-mails. The first contains no information about the candidate other than his/her name.
The second e-mail contains a detailed description of his/her current high-quality employment
status. The same implications are studied by Hanson and Hawley (2011), Baldini and Federici
(2011) and Friedman et a/. (2010), with the additional purpose of determining racial discrimina-
tion across neighborhoods. All these works show a negative bias against minorities. The intro-
duction of positive information in the e-mails (e.g. high social class, employment information,
education level) reduces or eliminates such bias.

9 Experimental studies
9.1 Approach and data collection

Field experiments construct control groups by matching similar individuals, for example applicants for a
job in situation-testing, and then observing the outcome of a quasi-experiment in a natural environment,
for example, in a job selection procedure. Empirical data from field experiments reflect a variety of
environmental factors: disentangling these factors may be difficult if not impossible. Controlled
experiments are conducted in an artificial environment, such as a laboratory, under tightly controlled
conditions, including the selection of treatment and control groups and strict rules regarding their
behavior and actions. On one hand, the impact of a specific factor can be evaluated by systematically
(e.g. randomly) varying it. On the other hand, confounding variables and other extraneous stimuli can
be minimized. In other words, while observational and quasi-experimental studies can only conclude
correlations, for example, whether grounds for discrimination co-occur with a negative decision,
controlled experiments lead to causation conclusions, that is, whether a negative decision is due to the
presence of grounds for discrimination. Controlled experiments are very useful to test the predictions
of theoretical models or to pre-test the impact of some ruling or laws before their application.
In addition, controlled experiments are repeatable, by definition, and less expensive than field experi-
ments. The main criticism against controlled experiments is that they suffer from a lack of realism,
also called the external validity problem, due to the selection of individuals from a specific population
(e.g. volunteer students) and to the influence on their behavior of the artificial experimental environment.
See Charness and Kuhn (2011) and Levitt and List (2007) for an in-depth discussion of these issues.
There are two main classes of controlled experiments: laboratory and natural experiments.
Levitt and List (2007) review five classes of games played by individuals or groups, which are

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
618 A. ROMEI AND S. RUGGIERI

adopted in the economic literature on laboratory experiments to measure social preferences,
including fairness, trust, and conditional reciprocity. Fershtman and Gneezy (2001) for instance,
adopt a trust game to test for ethnic discrimination. The trust game assumes two players. “Player
A’ is given a fixed amount of money and he/she is asked to transfer a certain amount to ‘player B’. The
transferred amount is triplicated. Then, ‘player B’ can choose to transfer any part of the received
amount back to ‘player A’. Players A and B are randomly paired from Israeli male students of
different ethnicities. The lower average amount of money transferred to players of a specific ethnicity,
compared with others, is considered evidence of discrimination against this ethnicity. Fershtman and
Gneezy found that the average transfer to players of European or American origin was about three
times the amount transferred to players of Asian or African origin.

Natural experiments occur in real life (controlled) situations. The experimenter only observes
the behavior of participants, who typically are not aware of the experiment. Television game
shows are a typical example, where discriminatory choices of participants can be studied in a
controlled environment. In addition to the criticism of external validity, natural experiments also
have the problem that not all factors can be controlled for, for example how participants are
selected in a TV game show. A detailed example is discussed in Section 9.2.

9.2 Data analysis methods

Controlled experiments are aimed at measuring reactions to a person’s characteristics while
manipulating only the person’s attributes that are grounds for possible discrimination, such as
race, sex, and age. Negative reactions that constitute an expression of various degrees of dis-
crimination include: verbal hostility (e.g. negative personal comments), disparate written ratings,
non-verbal indicators of hostility (e.g. seating distance, tone of voice, facial expressions), choice of
whether to associate with the person (e.g. in a work team, in competitive games), and deviation
from a baseline (e.g. from the optimal strategy in a game). Most of these reactions are typically not
detectable in observational data. Measures of disproportionality in reactions include those in
Figure 1. The main critical issue in experimental design is the construction of the control and
treatment groups, which, in our context, means the construction of the protected and unprotected
group members. In laboratory experiments, a randomization selection process is believed to result
in a balance over omitted variables, thus overcoming the omitted-variable bias of non-experimental
approaches. However, a causation conclusion of the findings of an experiment can be only drawn
for the, possibly biased, sample of population considered in the experiment, not for the general
population. This is known as the internal validity problem of controlled experiments.

We will now focus on a natural experiment based on the Weakest Link television game show. In
the Weakest Link, players compete with one another in a series of rounds. In each round, con-
testants take turns answering trivia questions, with the goal of building a ‘chain’ of answers. The
longer the chain, the higher the jackpot increase. At the conclusion of each round, players secretly
vote for a contestant to be eliminated, that is, the weakest link of the chain. The one who receives
the highest number of votes is eliminated from the next round. The last two contestants compete
for the whole accumulated jackpot on the basis of the number of correct answers in the last round.
Levitt (2004) collected data from 161 shows out of a total of 3273 person-votes. The recorded
attributes include race, age, education, and region of residence of the players, and their perfor-
mances in each round, including the number of questions, percentage of correct answers, number
of votes received. The aim of the work is to test for the presence of taste-based and statistical
discrimination. If there is no discrimination, the following optimal strategy of contestants should
be observed: in the early rounds, votes should be uniformly distributed; in the middle rounds, the
weakest players should be voted for, irrespective of their race, since they do not contribute to
increasing the jackpot; and in the final rounds, the strongest players should be voted for, irre-
spective of their race, since the other players would prefer not to compete with them in the last
round. On the other hand, taste-based discrimination implies persistent punishment in the number
of votes against the protected group in all rounds. Statistical discrimination, instead, implies

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
A multidisciplinary survey on discrimination analysis 619

higher votes for players of the protected group in the early rounds, since the race of the other
players is the only perceived characteristic of their performance; however, in the middle and final
rounds, the behavior should switch to the optimal strategy of no-discrimination. Levitt adopts
OLS regression models to estimate the number of votes received by a player in a round with
independent variables including the contestant’s attributes and performances in previous rounds.
Three separate models are computed, for the early, middle, and final rounds of the game. The
author claims that a negative binomial regression, typically adopted for estimating count vari-
ables, yields identical results. The results of the regression models are consistent with statistical
discrimination against Hispanics and with taste-based discrimination against the elderly.

9.3 Annotated bibliography

Surveys and comparisons. A review of laboratory studies from the early 1980s is reported by
Crosby e¢ a/. (1980). Harrison and List (2004) propose a taxonomy of experiments ranging from
conventional lab experiments, to field experiments in a natural environment without the awareness
of participants. Charness and Kuhn (2011) survey the contribution of lab experiments to labor
economics, including studies on discrimination. Methodological issues are also discussed, such as when
and why to adopt lab experiments, and how they compare with field experiments. Levitt and List
(2007) warn about the limits of generalizing results obtained from lab experiments, particularly from
experiments measuring social preferences through games. Blank ef a/. (2004: Ch. 6) present an
overview of experimental and audit methods with a discussion of their strengths and weaknesses.

Laboratory experiments. In labor market research, Feltovich and Papageorgiou (2004) aim to
investigate how quickly employers learn about the ability of a group of workers and, consequently,
update their prior opinions. They design a lab experiment in which subjects (modeling employers)
draw four cards (modeling new employees) from two buckets (modeling white and black groups)
for a total of nine rounds, with the first six rounds having a bias of card values in favor of the
‘white’ bucket. Page’s test for ordered alternatives”? is adopted for the statistical validation of the
results, which confirm that players tend to the optimal strategy of choosing from the ‘white’
bucket during early rounds, and randomly for late rounds. Dickinson and Oaxaca (2009) consider
‘second moment’ statistical discrimination by risk-adverse employers offering women lower wages
because of their perceived higher variance in productivity (vs. lower average productivity in ‘first
moment’ discrimination). They design a job auction game to simulate a labor market. At each
round of the game, employers decide the wage distribution among workers, and the workers
decide the productivity distribution among employers. Evidence of employer statistical dis-
crimination is found by comparing the wage distribution among the various rounds. Lab
experiments were revealed to be essential in complex contexts, for example, due to the scarcity of
reliable data or to the complexity of psycho-social interactions. Examples include the study of
discrimination against previously convicted job applicants (Falk et a/., 2008), and discrimination
in the co-employment of temporary and permanent workers (Giith et a/., 2010). Both papers use a
gift-exchange game, where employer players offer a wage to worker players, who in turn decide
their working input. Giith e¢ a/. (2010) classify workers into temporary or permanent, and wages
into publicly known or not. They found discrimination against permanent workers when wages
are not public. Falk e¢ a/. (2008) add to the CVs of workers information on previous conviction.
Ex-offenders suffer from a negative bias in offered wages. Finally, List (2004) argues that
laboratory experiments can complement audit studies in establishing the taste-based or statistical
nature of observed discrimination. He integrates audits with games in the sports card market.

A few study focus on favoritism toward attractive people, known as the beauty premium
(Hamermesh and Biddle, 1994), through a collaborative game. Andreoni and Petrie (2008) run
different experiments in which the employer player is or is not given information on the skills of

29 See Siegel and Castellan (1988).

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
620 A. ROMEI AND S. RUGGIERI

worker players. Differential wages are offered to good-looking employee players, the beauty premium,
when this information is not given. Mobius and Rosenblat (2006) also run experiments in which the
employer player has different interactions with worker players, ranging from only looking at the CV
with photo, to having phone interviews, to face-to-face interviews. The authors claim that the beauty
stereotype explains only about 30% of the differential treatments. The impact of stereotypical beliefs
regarding looks and accents is also tested by Rédin and Ozcan (2011) using a betting game. In each
round of the game, employer players decide workers’ wages for a pool of candidates. In the first
round, the only information available to employers is a facial portrait of each worker. In the second
round a voice message is added, and finally, in the last round the educational level is also revealed.
Results show that: in the first round, candidates that are perceived as non-Swedish are given lower
wages; and in the second round, candidates speaking Swedish with a foreign accent are given lower
wages, hence the speech-based stereotype dominates over the look-based stereotype.

In the context of group formation, Falk and Zehnder (2007) study discrimination in team
trusting by a variant of the investment game where pairs of players are selected from residents in
the same or in different districts of the same city. They found evidence of in-group favoritism,
where groups are made up of people from the same district. Another variant of the investment
game is used by Slonim and Guillen (2010) in dealing with gender preferences in group member
selection. They show discriminatory choices of men against men due to taste-based discrimination,
and of women against women due to expectations or stereotypes. Castillo and Petrie (2010) assess
racial differences in the rankings of preferences, claiming that the results of their analyses are the
same along several regression models (random-effects OLS, random-effects Tobit, OLS regression
with standard errors clustered on the individual doing the ranking, rank-ordered logit, and fixed-
effect regressions). They use a group formation game in which, at each round, participants decide
between a private and a public investment. Only the latter yields a return to all the members of the
group. In the first two sessions of the game (each consisting of 10 rounds), players are chosen
randomly to make up the group. In the third session, players can choose their own group. Players
use race to select individuals from their own group in the first rounds of the session, but not in the
final rounds. This is claimed as evidence of statistical discrimination.

Natural experiments. Discrimination analysis of data gathered from the Weakest Link game show
is also reported by Antonovics et af. (2005). In addition to taste-based and statistical dis-
crimination, they test strategic discrimination defined as the use of gender and race as ‘focal points
for collusive behavior’. However, they found no evidence of strategic discrimination. In terms of
analysis, they adopt conditional logit regression models. Other studies on the same game show
include: Antonovics et al. (2009), testing whether the gender of the opponent affects performance;
and Bagues and Villadoniga (2008), testing a statistical discrimination model of the ‘similar-to-me’
effects on evaluators. The former paper shows that the results obtained by replicating the Weakest
Link in a lab experiment differ from those of the TV show. The latter paper finds in-group
preferences in votes with respect both to gender and age. Lee (2009) analyses data on the number
of viewers of the American Idol TV show, collected through a Nielsen People Meter system,
showing that the racial composition of viewers determines the race of the person eliminated, while the
racial composition of the contestants affects viewing patterns.

The classic game known as the ‘prisoner’s dilemma’ has inspired several TV game shows where
members of a team compete for a prize either by cooperating with each other or by ‘defecting’
from the group. List (2006) analyses data from Friend or Foe? using probit regression to detect
statistical discrimination in the selection of team members. Men discriminate against women by
cooperating less in mixed-gender groups compared with an all-men group. This is not the case for
women. Dilks e¢ ai. (2010) aim at extending economic theories of discrimination by incorporating
insights from structural social psychology. They test implications of the extension by conditional
logit regression on data from the Survivor reality show.

The ‘beauty premium’ has also been studied using natural experiments. Belot ef al. (2012)
disentangle the sources of favoritism to attractive people by analysing data from a TV game show

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
A multidisciplinary survey on discrimination analysis 621

based on the prisoner’s dilemma. They use a conditional logit regression model, which shows that
less attractive contestants are more likely to be expelled by the game in the earlier rounds. No
evidence of taste-based discrimination is found by Darai and Gratz (2012) in the analysis of data
gathered from Golden Balls, a game show based on the prisoner’s dilemma. Other types of data
sources have also been considered. A recent work by Cipriani and Zago (2011) studies favoritism
toward attractive students in taking exams at university. The productivity of a student is measured
by the sum of his/her grades. A regression model is calculated describing student’s productivity in
terms of his/her characteristics and his/her physical attractiveness. They contrast differences in
productivity between written exams, where the beauty premium should be absent, and oral exams.
The related work by Breda and Ly (2012) uses a natural experiment to study gender differences
between oral and blind written tests. The study shows that professors tend to discriminate in favor
of females in typical male-concentrated disciplines, and in favor of males in female-concentrated
ones. The effectiveness of blind decisions in reducing gender discrimination has been evaluated in
an influential study regarding auditions for orchestras by Goldin and Rouse (2000). By using
probit regression, they found that, when a black screen is used to hide the identity of an applicant,
the probability of success for women increases.

10 Knowledge discovery studies

Discrimination data analysis has recently been tackled from a knowledge discovery, or data mining,
perspective, which is orthogonal to the method of data collection (observational, quasi-experimental,
or experimental). The perspective addresses discrimination along two lines: discrimination discovery
and discrimination prevention.

10.1 Discrimination discovery from data

Discrimination discovery from data consists in the actual discovery of discriminatory situations
and practices hidden in a large amount of historical decision records. Unlike hypothesis testing,
where a statistical analysis is adopted to confirm a predetermined hypothesis of discrimination, the
aim of discrimination discovery is to waveil contexts of possible discrimination. The legal principle
of under-representation with reference to legally grounded measures of the degree of dis-
crimination suffered by protected groups has inspired existing approaches for discrimination
discovery based on pattern mining. Starting with a data set of historical decision records,
Pedreschi et a/. (2008) and Ruggieri et a/. (2010b) propose the extraction of classification rules of
the form A, BC, called potentially discriminatory (PD) rules, to unveil contexts B of the data set
where the protected group A suffered from under-representation w.r.t the positive decision C or
from over-representation w.r.t the negative decision C. A is a non-empty itemset, whose elements
belong to a fixed set of protected groups. C is a class item denoting the negative decision, for
example, credit denial, application rejection, job firing, and so on. Finally, B is an itemset denoting
a context of possible discrimination. The degree of over-representation is measured by the ER
measure (called extended lift by the authors) from Figure 1, where the contingency table refers to
only those records satisfying B. For example:

RACE = BLACK, PURPOSE = NEW_CAR — CREDIT = NO

isa PD rule about denying credit (the decision C) to blacks (the protected group A) among those
applying for credit in order to buy a new car (the context B). PD rules are ranked according to
their measure value. The approach has been implemented on top of an Oracle database (Ruggieri
et al., 2010c) by relying on tools for frequent itemset mining. A graphical user interface (GUI) for
visual exploratory analysis has been developed by Gao and Berendt (2011). Extensions of the
approach by Pedreschi et a/. (2009) and Ruggieri et al. (2010a) deal with: (1) any measure built from a
contingency table as in Figure 1; (2) the statistical significance of measures of discrimination of an

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
622 A. ROMEI AND S. RUGGIERI

extracted rule; (3) the discovery of affirmative actions and favoritism; and (4) the filtering of rules that
can be supported by a genuine occupational requirement. The rankings imposed by the discrimination
measures in Figure | are investigated by Pedreschi et al. (2012): the choice of the reference measure
critically affects the rankings of PD rules, with the RC (mainly adopted in the United States) and the
RR (mainly adopted in the EU) measures exhibiting the largest differences. The approach has also
been extended by Luong (2011) to unveil and represent discrimination in a ‘rich semantic’ form for
semi-structured business data based on support from ontologies.

There are two major drawbacks of the approach. First, there is no control, within a context B,
of the characteristics of the protected group A as opposed to others in such a context. Since the
discrimination measures are defined as aggregated values, they mix decisions for people that may
be very different in terms of the skills required to obtain a benefit. This results in an overly large
number of rules that need to be further screened to filter out explainable discrimination. Second,
the result of the knowledge discovery process is a (possibly large) set of classification rules, which
provide /ocal and overlapping niches of possible discrimination: a global description is lacking of
who is and is not discriminated against. Luong et al. (2011) exploit the idea of situation-testing.
For each member of the protected group with a negative decision outcome, testers with similar
characteristics are searched for in a data set of historical decision records. If there are significantly
different decision outcomes between the testers of the protected group and the testers of the
unprotected group, the negative decision can be ascribed to a bias against the protected group,
thus labeling the individual as discriminated against. Similarity is modeled via a distance function.
Testers are searched for among the k-nearest neighbors, and the difference is measured by one of
the functions in Figure 1 calculated over the two sets of testers. After this kind of labeling, a global
description of those labeled as discriminated against can be extracted as a standard classification
task. A real case study in the context of the evaluation of scientific projects for funding is pre-
sented by Romei ef al. (2012).

The approaches described so far assume that the data set under analysis contains attributes that
denote protected groups. This may be not the case when such attributes are not available, or not
even collectable at a micro-data level, as in the case of the loan applicant’s race. Ruggieri et al.
(2010a, 2010b) adopt a form of rule inference to cope with the indirect discovery of (either direct
or indirect) discrimination. Intuitively, a PD rule A, B>C, which is not directly computable, can
be deduced from classification rules without protected items, for example, of the form D, B>C,
where D is an itemset of properties strongly correlated in the context B with some protected group
A (e.g. low education level with minority race in some city neighborhood). The correlation
information is called background knowledge, and is itself coded as an association rule.

10.2. Discrimination prevention in data mining

Data mining and machine learning models extracted from historical data may discover traditional
prejudices that are endemic in reality (i.e. taste-based discrimination), or patterns of lower per-
formances, skills or capacities of protected-by-law groups (i.e. statistical discrimination). Mining
algorithms may then assign the status of general rules to such practices, with the result that these
rules may be deeply hidden within a data mining classifier. Sensitive application fields include
personnel selection*? and human resources management, gender identification, fraud detection in
insurance claims, intrusion and crime detection, and credit scoring. Discrimination prevention in
data mining and machine learning consists of extracting models (typically, classifiers) that trade
off accuracy with non-discrimination.

Discrimination prevention has been recognized as an issue in a tutorial by Clifton (2003: Slide
19) where the danger of building classifiers capable of racial discrimination in home loans has been
put forward. For example, mortgage redlining can be easily recognized as a common pattern in

30 Where automated systems are designed to be ‘capable of reproducing the judgment of the recruitment
consultant’ (Kessler et a/., 2009).

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
A multidisciplinary survey on discrimination analysis 623

loan data. Similar warnings were raised in the context of automated credit scoring systems, for
example, by the Consumer Federation of America & National Credit Reporting Association
(2002). The naive approach of deleting attributes that denote protected groups from the original
data set does not prevent a classifier from indirectly learning discriminatory decisions, since other
attributes (sometimes called redundant encodings) that are strongly correlated with them could be
used as proxies by the mining algorithm. This has been repeatedly observed in several contexts:
credit scoring (Fortowsky & LaCour-Little, 2001), predictive statistics (Pope & Sydnor, 2007), and
data mining (Ruggieri et al., 2010b; Calders & Zliobaityé, 2013). The earliest approaches to
developing classifiers that do not incur in indirect discrimination were proposed in the area of
credit scoring. Fortowsky and LaCour-Little (2001) originally considered logistic regression
models, proposing a re-weighting of regression coefficients. The incorporation of anti-
discrimination law requirements in credit scoring systems is currently challenging—for a recent
approach, see Lieli and White (2010). As for data mining approaches, we foresee four non-mutually
exclusive strategies regarding discrimination prevention.

The first strategy consists of a controlled distortion of the training set (a pre-processing
approach). Kamiran and Calders (2012) compare sanitization techniques such as changing class
labels based on prediction confidence, instance re-weighting, and sampling. Zliobaityé et al. (2011)
prevent excessive sanitization by taking into account legitimate explanatory variables that are
correlated with grounds of discrimination, that is, genuine occupational requirements. The
approach of Luong et a/. (2011) extends to discrimination prevention by changing the class label of
individuals that are labeled as discriminated against. Using additional background knowledge,
Hajian and Domingo-Ferrer (2012) perturb the training set so as to reduce the degree of indirect
discrimination, which is measured in terms of the number of rules that could be inferred using the
approach of Ruggieri et al. (2010a, 2010b). The advantage of pre-processing approaches is that
they are independent of the learning model and algorithm at hand.

The second strategy is to modify the classification learning algorithm (an in-processing
approach), by integrating it with anti-discrimination criteria. Calders and Verwer (2010) consider
three approaches to deal with naive Bayes models, two of which consist in modifications to the
learning algorithm: training a separate model for each protected group; and, adding a latent
variable to model the class value in the absence of discrimination. Kamiran et al. (2010) modify the
entropy-based splitting criterion in decision tree induction to account for attributes denoting
protected groups. Kamishima e¢ a/. (2012) measure the indirect causal effect of variables modeling
grounds of discrimination on the independent variable in a classification model by their mutual
information. Then they apply a regularization (i.e. a change in the objective minimization function) to
probabilistic discriminative models, such as logistic regression.

The third strategy is to post-process the classification model once it has been extracted.
Pedreschi et a/. (2009) alter the confidence of classification rules inferred by the CPAR algorithm.
Calders and Verwer (2010) act on the probabilities of a naive Bayes model. Kamiran et a/. (2010)
re-label the class predicted at the leaves of a decision tree induced by C4.5.

Finally, the fourth strategy assumes no change in the construction of a classifier. At the time
of application, instead, predictions are corrected to keep proportionality of decisions among
protected and unprotected groups. Kamiran ef a/. (2012) propose correcting predictions of
probabilistic classifiers that are close to the decision boundary, given that (statistical) dis-
crimination may occur when there is no clear feature supporting a positive or a negative decision.

There is a summary of the contributions of research groups in discrimination discovery and
prevention in a recent book edited by Custers et al. (2013). The book covers the design of data-driven
technologies, such as data mining and profiling, and this design is privacy and discrimination
aware. Legal and ethical issues of discrimination, privacy, and profiling are also dealt with.
The chapter by Gellert et a/. (2013) reports a comparative analysis of data protection and
anti-discrimination legislations.

A technical approach that tackles both privacy in disclosing data mining models and dis-
crimination in applying such models is discussed by Hajian et a/. (2012). The work considers

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
624 A. ROMEI AND S. RUGGIERI

classification rule models and measures privacy by k-anonymity and discrimination by the number
of PD rules. Dwork et a/. (2012) propose a model of fairness of classifiers and relate it to
differential privacy in databases. The model imposes that the predictions over two similar cases are
also similar. The similarity of cases is formalized by a distance measure between tuples. The
similarity of predictions is formalized by the distance between the distributions of probability
assigned to class values.

11 Conclusions

We have provided an annotated bibliography of the main references and recent approaches on
discrimination data analysis. Our focus has been on analytical methods, whereas pure psychological
or sociological studies have not been covered. Nevertheless, the relevant literature is abundant and
spread over many disciplines. We cited 422 references, 50% of which have appeared in the last
5 years (2008-2012), and 73% of which have appeared in the last decade (2003-2012). This
demonstrates a never-ending interest in the topic, which has recently been stimulated by the advent
of the knowledge society. A society where decisions—small or big, by business or policy makers—
can be taken on the basis of models, patterns, profiles, and rules of human behavior distilled from
the ubiquitous digital traces generated as a side effect of our (online and off-line) lives.

Acknowledgments

The authors are grateful to Franco Turini and to the anonymous reviewers for several helpful
comments.

References

Aalbers, M. 2007. What types of neighbourhoods are redlined? Journal of Housing and the Built Environment
22(2), 177-198.

Agier, I. & Szafarz, A. 2013. Microfinance and gender: is there a glass ceiling on loan size? World
Development 42(0), 165-181.

Agresti, A. 2002. Categorical Data Analysis. Wiley Series in Probability and Statistics, 2nd edn. Wiley-
Interscience.

Agresti, A. & Brian, C. 2000. Simple and effective confidence intervals for proportions and differences of
proportions result from adding two successes and two failures. The American Statistician 54(4), 280-288.

Ahmed, A., Andersson, L. & Hammarstedt, M. 2013. Are gay men and lesbians discriminated against in the
hiring process? Southern Economic Journal 79(3), 565-585.

Ahmed, A. M. & Hammarstedt, M. 2008. Discrimination in the rental housing market: a field experiment on
the internet. Journal of Urban Economics 64(2), 362-372.

Aigner, D. J. & Cain, G. G. 1977. Statistical theories of discrimination in labor markets. Industrial and Labor
Relations Review 30, 175-187.
Albareto, G. & Mistrulli, P. 2011. Bridging the gap between migrants and the banking system. Economic
Working Paper 794, Bank of Italy, Economic Research Department. http://www. bancaditalia.it.
Aldrich, E. M., Arcidiacono, P. S. & Vigdor, J. L. 2005. Do people value racial diversity? Evidence from
Nielsen ratings. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 5(1), Article 4.

Alesina, A. F. & Ferrara, E. L. 2011. A test of racial Bias in capital sentencing. Working Paper 16981,
National Bureau of Economic Research. http: //www.nber.org.

Alesina, A. F., Lotti, F. & Mistrulli, P. E. 2008. Do women pay more for credit? Evidence from Italy.
Working papers 14202, National Bureau of Economic Research. http: //www.nber.org.

Alpert, G. P., Smith, M. R. & Dunham, R. G. 2004. Toward a better benchmark: assessing the utility of
not-at-fault traffic crash data in racial profiling research. Justice Research and Policy 6(1), 43-70.

Altonji, J. G. & Blank, R. M. 1999. Race and gender in the labor market. In Handbook of Labor Economics,
Ashenfelter, O. & Card, D. (eds). Elsevier, vol. 3, Part C, 3143-3259.

Altonji, J. G. & Pierret, C. R. 2001. Employer learning and statistical discrimination. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 116(1), 313-350.

Amemiya, T. 1984. Tobit models: a survey. Journal of Econometrics 24(1—2), 3-61.

American Psychological Association 2011. Guidelines for psychological practice with lesbian, gay, and
bisexual clients. http: //www.apa.org.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
A multidisciplinary survey on discrimination analysis 625

Anbarci, N. & Lee, J. 2008. Speed discounting and racial disparities: evidence from speeding tickets in
Boston. Discussion Paper 3903, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA). nttp://ftp.iza-.org.

Andreoni, J. & Petrie, R. 2008. Beauty, gender and stereotypes: evidence from laboratory experiments.
Journal of Economic Psychology 29{1), 73-93.

Antonovics, K. L., Arcidiacono, P. & Walsh, R. 2005. Games and discrimination: lessons from the Weakest
Link. Journal of Human Resources 40(4), 918-947.

Antonovics, K. L., Arcidiacono, P. & Walsh, R. 2009. The effects of gender interactions in the lab and in the
field. Review of Economics and Statistics 91(1), 152-162.

Antonovics, K. L. & Knight, B. G. 2009. A new look at racial profiling: evidence from the Boston Police
Department. Working Paper 10634, National Bureau of Economic Research. http: //www.nber.org.
Anwar, S. & Fang, H. 2006. An alternative test of racial prejudice in motor vehicle searches: theory and

evidence. American Economic Review 96(1), 127-151.

Anwar, S. & Fang, H. 2011. Testing for the role of prejudice in emergency departments using bounceback
tates. Working Paper 16888, National Bureau of Economic Research. http: / /www.nber.org.

Arai, M., Moa Bursell, M. & Nekby, L. 2008. Between meritocracy and ethnic discrimination: the
gender difference. Research Papers in Economics 2008:4, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA). http: //
ftp.iza.org.

Arcidiacono, P., Bayer, P. & Hizmo, A. 2010. Beyond signaling and human capital: education and the
revelation of ability. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2(4), 76-104.

Armstrong, M. 2006. Recent developments in the economics of price discrimination. In Proceedings of World
Congress on Advances in Economics and Econometrics Theory and Applications, Blundell, R., Newey, W. K.
& Persson, T. (eds). Cambridge University Press, vol. 2, 146.

Arrow, K. J. 1971. The theory of discrimination. In Discrimination in Labor Markets, Ashenfelter, O. &
Rees, A. (eds). Princeton University Press, 3-33.

Ashenfelter, O. & Card, D. 1985. Using the longitudinal structure of earnings to estimate the effect of training
programs. The Review of Economics and Statistics 67(4), 648-660.

Asiedu, E., Freeman, J. A. & Nti-Addae, A. 2012. Access to credit by small businesses: how relevant are race,
ethnicity, and gender? American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 102(3), 532-537.

Australian Legislation. 2012. (a) Age Discrimination Act, 2004; (b) Australian Human Rights Commission
Act, 1986; (c) Disability Discrimination Act, 1992; (d) Racial Discrimination Act, 1975; (e) Sex Dis-
crimination Act, 1984; (f) Victoria Equal Opportunity Act, 1995, (¢) Queensland Anti-Discrimination Act,
1991. http: //humanrights.gov.au.

Autor, D. H. & Scarborough, D. 2008. Does job testing harm minority workers? Evidence from retail
establishments. Quarterly Journal of Economics 123(1), 219-277.

Avery, R. B., Brevoort, K. & Canner, G. B. 2010. Does credit scoring produce a disparate impact? Finance
and economics discussion series, Division of Research & Statistics and Monetary Affairs, Federal Reserve
Board. http: //works.bepress.com/kbrevoort/9.

Avery, R. B., Canner, G. B. & Cook, R. E. 2005. New information reported under HMDA and its appli-
cation in fair lending enforcement. Federal Reserve Bulletin 913), 344-394.

Ayres, I. & Siegelman, P. 1995. Race and gender discrimination in bargaining for a new car. The American
Economic Review 85(3), 304-321.

Ayres, I, Vars, F. E. & Zakariya, N. 2005. To insure prejudice: racial disparities in taxicab tipping. Yale Law
Journal 114(7), 1613-1674.

Bagues, M. F. & Villadoniga, M. J. P. 2008. Why do i like people like me? Working Paper 2008-06,
Universidad Carlos III, Departamento de Economia de la Empresa. http://papers.ssrn.com.

Bailey, T. & Gatrell, T. (eds). 1996. Interactive Spatial Data Analysis. Prentice Hall.

Baker, A. & Phillipson, G. 2011. Policing, profiling and discrimination law: US and European approaches
compared. Journal of Global Ethics 7(1), 105-124.

Baldini, M. & Federici, M. 2011. Ethnic discrimination in the Italian rental housing market. The Journal of
Housing Economics 2(1), 1-14.

Balsa, A. L, Mcguire, T. G. & Meredith, L. S. 2005. Testing for statistical discrimination in health care.
Health Services Research 4(1), 227-252.

Bamforth, N., Malik, M. & O’Cinneide, C. 2008. Discrimination Law: Theory & Context, Text and Materials,
Ist edn. Sweet & Maxwell.

Banerjee, A., Bertrand, M., Datta, S. & Mullainathan, S. 2009. Labor market discrimination in Delhi:
evidence from a field experiment. Journal of Comparative Economics 37(1), 14-27.

Barnard, C. & Hepple, B. 2000. Substantive equality. The Cambridge Law Journal 59(3), 562-585.

Bauer, T. & Sinning, M. 2008. An extension of the Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition to nonlinear models.
AStA Advances in Statistical Analysis 92, 197-206.

Bauer, T. K. & Sinning, M. 2010. Blinder—Oaxaca decomposition for tobit models. Applied Economics 42(12),
1569-1575.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
626 A. ROMEI AND S. RUGGIERI

Bayer, P., Casey, M. D., Ferreira, F. & McMillan, R. 2012. Price discrimination in the housing market.
Working Paper 18069, National Bureau of Economic Research. http: //www.nber.org.

Becker, G. 8. 1971. The Economics of Discrimination (Economic Research Studies), 2nd edn. University of
Chicago Press.

Bell, M. R. 2002. Anti-Discrimination Law and the European Union. Oxford University Press.

Belot, M., Bhaskar, V. & Van de Ven, J. 2012. Beauty and the sources of discrimination. Journal of Human
Resources 47(3), 851-872.

Bendick, M. 2007. Situation testing for employment discrimination in the United States of America. Horizons
Stratégiques 3(5), 17-39.

Bendick, M., Rodriguez, R. E. & Jayaraman, S. 2010. Employment discrimination in upscale restaurants:
evidence from matched pair testing. Secial Science Journal 47(4), 802-818.

Bentley, J. T. & Adamson, R. 2003. Gender differences in the careers of academic scientists and engineers: a
literature review. Special Report, National Science Foundation. nttp: //www.nsf.gov.

Berkovec, J. A., Canner, G. B., Gabriel, S. A. & Hannan, T. H. 1994. Race, redlining, and residential
mortgage loan performance. Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics 9(3), 263-294.

Berkovec, J. A., Canner, G. B., Gabriel, S. A. & Hannan, T. H. 1998. Discrimination, competition, and loan
performance in FHA mortgage lending. The Review of Economics and Statistics 8(2), 241-250.

Berri, D. J. & Simmons, R. 2009. Race and the evaluation of signal callers in the National Football League.
Journal of Sports Econonomics 10(1), 23-43.

Bertero, A. P. 2011. Gender discrimination in the United States tariff schedule: does unequal tariff treatment of
men’s and women’s products constitute an equal protection violation? Working Paper. nttp: //ssrn.com.
Bertrand, M., Chugh, D. & Mullainathan, S. 2005. Implicit discrimination. American Economic Review 95(2),

94-98.

Bertrand, M., Duflo, E. & Mullainathan, S. 2004. How much should we trust differences-in-differences
estimates? The Quarterly Journal of Economics 1191), 249-275.

Bertrand, M. & Mullainathan, S. 2004. Are Emily and Greg more employable than Lakisha and Jamal?
A field experiment on labor market discrimination. American Economic Review 94(4), 991-1013.

Bickel, P. J., Hammel, E. A. & O’Connell, J. W. 1975. Sex bias in graduate admissions: data from Berkeley.
Science 187(4175), 398-404.

Black, S. E. & Brainerd, E. 2004. Importing equality? The impact of globalization on gender discrimination.
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 57(4), 540-559.

Black, S. E. & Strahan, P. E. 2001. The division of spoils: rent-sharing and discrimination in a regulated
industry. American Economic Review 91(4), 814-831.

Blackburn, M. L. & Vermilyea, T. 2006. A comparison of unexplained racial disparities in bank-level and
market-level models of mortgage lending. Journal of Financial Services Research 29(2), 125-147.

Blackburn, M. L. & Vermilyea, T. 2007. The role of information externalities and scale economies in home
mortgage lending decisions. Journal of Urban Economics 61(1), 71-85.

Blalock, G., DeVaro, J. L., Leventhal, S. & Simon, D. H. 2007. Gender bias in power relationships: evidence
from police traffic stops. Working Paper, Cornell University, School of Industrial and Labor Relations.
http://ssrn.com.

Blanchard, L., Zhao, B. & Yinger, J. 2008. Do lenders discriminate against minority and woman entrepre-
neurs? Journal of Urban Economics 63(2), 467-497.

Blanchflower, D. G., Levine, P. B. & Zimmerman, D. J. 2003. Discrimination in the small-business credit
market. The Review of Economics and Statistics 85(4), 930-943.

Blank, E., Venkatachalam, P., McNeil, L. & Green, R. 2005. Racial discrimination in mortgage lending in
Washington, D.C.: a mixed methods approach. The Review of Black Political Economy 33(2), 9-30.

Blank, R. M., Dabady, M. & Citro, C. F. (eds). 2004. Measuring Racial Discrimination — Panel on Methods
for Assessing Discrimination. National Academies Press.

Blinder, A. 1973. Wage discrimination: reduced form and structural estimates. Journal of Human Resources 8,
436-455.

Bocian, D. G., Ernst, K. S. & Li, W. 2008. Race, ethnicity and subprime home loan pricing. Journal of
Economics and Business 60(1—2), 110-124.

Bonoli, G. & Hinrichs, K. 2010. Statistical discrimination and employers’ recruitment practices for low skilled
workers. Working Paper 10-2010, Reconciling Work and Welfare in Europe. nttp://ssrn.com.

Boo, F. L., Rossi, M. A. & Urzua, S. 2012. The labor market return to an attractive face: evidence from a
field experiment. Discussion Paper 6356, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA). nttp://ftp.iza.org.

Booth, A. L. & Leigh, A. 2010. Do employers discriminate by gender? A field experiment in female-domi-
nated occupations. Economics Letters 107(2), 236-238.

Booth, A. L., Leigh, A. & Varganova, E. 2010. Does racial and ethnic discrimination vary across minority
groups? Evidence from a field experiment. Discussion Paper 4947, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA).
http://ftp.iza.org.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
A multidisciplinary survey on discrimination analysis 627

Bornmann, L., Mutz, R. & Daniel, H.-D. 2007. Gender differences in grant peer review: a meta-analysis.
Journal of Informetrics 13), 226-238.

Bornmann, L., Mutz, R. & Daniel, H.-D. 2008. Latent markov modeling applied to grant peer review.
Journal of Informetrics 23), 217-228.

Bosch, M., Carnero, M. A. & Farré, L. 2010. Information and discrimination in the rental housing market:
evidence from a field experiment. Regional Science and Urban Economics 40(1), 11-19.

Breda, T. & Ly, S. T. 2012. Do professors really perpetuate the gender gap in science? Evidence from a
natural experiment in a French higher education institution. Discussion Papers CEEDP0138, Centre for
the Economics of Education (CEE). http: //cee.lse.ac.uk.

Brevoort, K. P. 2011. Credit card redlining revisited. Review of Economics and Statistics 93(2), 714-724.

Brown, C. L. & Simpson, W. G. 2010. An analysis of alternative methodologies and interpretations
of mortgage discrimination research using simulated data. Academy of Banking Studies Journal 9(2),
65-75.

Brown, R. 2010. Prejudice: Its Social Psychology, 2nd edn. Wiley-Blackwell.

Broyles, P. & Keen, B. 2010. Consumer discrimination in the NBA: an examination of the effect of race on
the value of basketball trading cards. The Social Science Journal 47(1), 162-171.

Cain, G. G. 1987. The economic analysis of labor market discrimination: a survey. In Handbook of Labor
Economics, Ashenfelter, O. & Layard, R. (eds). Elsevier, 1, 693-781.

Calders, T. & Zliobaityé, I. 2013. Why unbiased computational processes can lead to discriminative decision
procedures. In Discrimination and Privacy in the Information Society, volume 3 of Studies in Applied
Philosophy, Epistemology and Rational Ethics, Custers, B. H. M., Calders, T., Schermer, B. W. & Zarsky,
T. Z. (eds). Springer, 43-57.

Calders, T. & Verwer, S. 2010. Three naive bayes approaches for discrimination-free classification. Data
Mining & Knowledge Discovery 21(2), 277-292.

Calem, P. S., Gillen, K. & Wachter, S. 2004. The neighborhood distribution of subprime mortgage lending.
Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics 29(4), 393-410.

Calvo-Armengol, A. & Jackson, M. O. 2004. The effects of social networks on employment and inequality.
The American Economic Review 94(3), 426-454.

Calvo-Armengol, A. & Jackson, M. O. 2007. Networks in labor markets: wage and employment dynamics
and inequality. Journal of Economic Theory 132(1), 27-46.

Campbell, R., Roberts, B. & Rogers, K. 2008. An evaluation of lender redlining in allocation of unsecured
consumer credit. Urban Studies 45(5), 1243-1254.

Card, D. & Lemieux, T. 1994. Changing wage structure and black-white differentials among men and
women: a longitudinal analysis. American Economic Review 84, 29-33.

Card, D. & Lemieux, T. 1996. Wage dispersion, returns to skill, and black-white wage differentials. Journal of
Econometrics 74, 319-361.

Carlsson, M. & Eriksson, S. 2012. Do reported attitudes towards immigrants predict ethnic discrimination?
Working Paper 2012-6, Department of Economics, Uppsala University, Sweden. nttp: //swopec.hhs.se.

Carlsson, M. & Rooth, D.-O. 2007. Evidence of ethnic discrimination in the Swedish labor market using
experimental data. Labour Economics 14(4), 716-729.

Case, M. A. C. 1995. Disageregating gender from sex and sexual orientation: the effeminate man in the law
and feminist jurisprudence. The Yale Law Journal 105(1), 1-105.

Castillo, M. & Petrie, R. 2010. Discrimination in the lab: does information trump appearance? Games and
Economic Behavior 68(1), 50-59.

Cavalluzzo, K., Cavalluzzo, L. & Wolken, J. 2002. Competition, small business financing, and discrimina-
tion: evidence from a new survey. Journal of Business 75(4), 641-680.

Ceci, S. J. & Williams, W. M. 2011. Understanding current causes of women’s underrepresentation in science.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108(8), 3157-3162.

Chan, J. 2011. Racial profiling and police subculture. Canadian Journal of Criminology and Criminal Justice
53(1), 75-78.

Chan, S., Gedal, M., Been, V. & Haughwout, A. F. 2011. The role of neighborhood characteristics in
mortgage default risk: evidence from New York City. Working Paper 4551, NYU Wagner School and
Furman Center for Real Estate & Urban Policy. http: //www.ssrn.com.

Chandra, A. & Staiger, D. O. 2010. Identifying provider prejudice in healthcare. Working Paper 16382,
National Bureau of Economic Research.

Charles, K. K. & Guryan, J. 2008. Prejudice and wages: an empirical assessment of Becker’s “The economics
of discrimination’. Journal of Political Economy 116(5), 773-809.

Charles, K. K. & Guryan, J. 2011. Studying discrimination: fundamental challenges and recent progress.
Annual Review of Economics 3, 479-511.

Charness, G. & Kuhn, P. 2011. Lab labor: what can labor economists learn from the lab?. In Handbook of
Labor Economics, Ashenfelter, O. & Card, D. (eds). Elsevier, 4, 229-330.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
628 A. ROMEI AND S. RUGGIERI

Cheng, P., Lin, Z. & Liu, Y. 2011. Do women pay more for mortgages? The Journal of Real Estate Finance
and Economics 43(4), 423-440.

Cheung, S. 2010. A test of employer learning in the labour market for young Australians. Applied Economics
Letters 17(1), 93-98.

Chopin, I. & Do, T. U. 2010. Developing Anti-Discrimination Law in Europe. European Network of Legal
Experts in Anti-Discrimination. http: //ec.europa.eu.

Christensen, R. 2002. Plane Answers to Complex Questions: The Theory of Linear Models, 3rd edn. Springer,
New York.

Cipriani, G. P. & Zago, A. 2011. Productivity or discrimination? Beauty and the exams. Oxford Bulletin of
Economics and Statistics 73(3), 428-447.

Clark, W. A. V. 1991. Residential preferences and neighborhood racial segregation: a test of the Schelling
segregation model. Demography 28(1), 1-19.

Clarke, J., Roy, N. & Courchane, M. 2009. On the robustness of racial discrimination findings in mortgage
lending studies. Applied Economics 41(18), 2279-2297.

Clifton, C. 2003. Privacy preserving data mining: How do we mine data when we aren’t allowed to see it?
In Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining
(KDD 2003), Tutorial, Washington, DC, USA. http: //www.cs.purdue.edu.

Coate, S. & Loury, G. C. 1993. Will affirmative-action policies eliminate negative stereotypes? American
Economic Review 83(5), 1220-1240.

Cohen-Cole, E. 2009. Credit card redlining. Working Paper QAU08-1, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.
http://www.bos.frb.org.

Coleman, B. J.,. DuMond, J. M. & Lynch, A. K. 2008. An examination of NBA MVP voting behavior: does
race matter? Journal of Sports Economics 9(6), 606-627.

Combes, P.-P., Decreuse, B., Laouenan, M. & Trannoy, A. 2011. Customer discrimination and employment
outcomes: theory and evidence from the French labor market. http: //hal.archives-ouvertes.fr.

Consumer Federation of America & National Credit Reporting Association. 2002. Credit score accuracy and
implications for consumers. http: //www.consumerfed.org.

Cornaglia, F. & Feldman, N. E. 2011. Productivity, wages, and marriage: the case of Major League Baseball.
Discussion Paper 5695, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA). nttp://ftp.iza.org.

Cotton, J. 1988. On the decomposition of wage differentials. The Review of Economics and Statistics 70(2),
236-243.

Council of the EU 1999. Resolution 1999/C 201/01 on Women and Science. http: //eur-lex.europa. eu.

Courchane, M. J. 2007. The pricing of home mortgage loans to minority borrowers: how much of the APR
differential can we explain? Journal of Real Estate Research 29(4), 399-440.

Coyne, C. J., Isaacs, J. & Schwartz, J. 2010. Entrepreneurship and the taste for discrimination. Journal of
Evolutionary Economics 20(4), 609-627.

Crosby, F., Bromley, 8. & Saxe, L. 1980. Recent unobtrusive studies of black and white discrimination and
prejudice: a literature review. Psychological Bulletin 87(3), 546-563.

Custers, B. H. M., Calders, T., Schermer, B. W. & Zarsky, T. Z. (eds). 2013. Discrimination and Privacy in the
Information Society, volume 3 of Studies in Applied Philosophy, Epistemology and Rational Ethics. Springer.

Darai, D. & Gratz, S. 2012. Facing a dilemma: cooperative behavior and beauty. Working Paper 82, University of
Zurich, Department of Economics. http: //www.merlin.uzh.ch.

Dickinson, D. L. & Oaxaca, R. L. 2009. Statistical discrimination in labor markets: an experimental analysis.
Southern Economic Journal 76(1), 16-31.

Dietrich, J. 2009. Does multiple jeopardy exist in mortgage markets? Economics Working Paper 2009-3,
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. http: //www.occ.treas.gov.

Dietrich, J. & Johannsson, H. 2005. Searching for age and gender discrimination in mortgage lending. Economics
Working Paper 2005-2, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. http: //www.occ.treas.gov.

Dilks, L. M., Thye, S. R. & Taylor, P. A. 2010. Socializing economic theories of discrimination: lessons from
Survivor. Social Science Research 39(6), 1164-1180.

Ding, L., Ratcliffe, J., Steeman, M. & Quercia, R. 2008. Neighborhood patterns of high-cost lending: the case
of Atlanta. Journal of Affordable Housing 17(3), 194-211.

Dobson, A. J. & Barnett, A. G. 2008. Introduction to Generalized Linear Models, 3rd edn. Chapman and Hall/CRC.

Doleac, J. L. & Stein, L. C. D. 2010. The visible hand: Race and online market outcomes. Discussion Paper
09-015, Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research. http: / /www.stanford.edu.

Donohue, J. J. 2007. The law and economics of antidiscrimination law. In Handbook of Law and Economics,
Polinsky, A. M. & Shavell, S. (eds). Elsevier, 1387-1472.

Drydakis, N. 2009. Sexual orientation discrimination in the labour market. Labour Economics 16(4), 364-372.

Dwork, C., Hardt, M., Pitassi, T., Reingold, O. & Zemel, R. S. 2012. Fairness through awareness.
In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science (ITCS 2012),
Goldwasser S. (ed.). ACM, 214-226.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
A multidisciplinary survey on discrimination analysis 629

Dymski, G. A. 2006. Discrimination in the credit and housing markets: findings and challenges. In Handbook
on the Economics of Discrimination, Rodgers, W. M. (ed). 3rd edn. Edward Elgar Publishing, 215-259.

Dymski, G. A., Hernandez, J. & Mohanty, L. 2011. Race, power, and the subprime/foreclosure crisis:
a mesoanalysis. Economics Working Paper 669, Levy Economics Institute of Bard College. http: //ssrn.com.

Echenique, F. & Fryer, R. G. 2007. A measure of segregation based on social interactions. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 122(2), 441-485.

Edelberg, W. 2007. Racial dispersion in consumer credit interest rates. Finance and Economics Discussion
Series 2007-2028, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (US).

Ellis, E. 2005. EU Anti-Discrimination Law. Oxford University Press.

European Network Against Racism (ENAR). 2007. Fact sheet 33: Multiple discrimination. http: //www.
enar-eu.org.

ENAR. 2008. Fact sheet 35: Positive actions. http: //www.enar-eu.org.

Engel, R. S. 2008. A critique of the “outcome test” in racial profiling research. Justice Quarterly 25(1), 1-36.

Engel, R. S. & Calnon, J. M. 2004. Comparing benchmark methodologies for police-citizen contacts: traffic
stop data collection for the Pennsylvania State Police. Police Quarterly 7(1), 97-125.

Engel, R. S., Calnon, J. M. & Bernard, T. J. 2002. Theory and racial profiling: shortcomings and future
directions in research. Justice Quarterly 19(2), 1-36.

Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. 1978. Uniform guidelines on employee selection procedure,
43 FR 38295. http: //www.gpo.gov.

Eriksson, S. & Lagerstrom, J. 2012. Detecting discrimination in the hiring process: evidence from an Internet-
based search channel. Empirical Economics 43(2), 537-563.

EU Agency for Fundamental Rights. 2011. Handbook on European non-discrimination law. European Court
of Human Rights. http: //fra.europa.eu.

European Commission. 2007. Tackling multiple discrimination: practices, policies and laws. Directorate
General for Employment, Social Affairs and Equal Opportunities, Unit G.4. http: //ec. europa. eu.
European Commission. 2009. The gender challenge in research funding: assessing the European national

scenes. Directorate General for Research, Science, Economy and Society, Unit L.4. http: //ec.europa.eu.

European Commission. 2010. Compilation of case law on the equality of treatment between women and men
and on non-discrimination in the european union. Directorate General for Employment, Social Affairs
and Equal Opportunities, Unit G.2. nttp://ec.europa.eu.

European Commission. 2012. Meta-analysis of gender and science research, Directorate General for Research
and Innovation, Sector B6.2. http: //www.genderandscience.org.

European Union Legislation. 2012. (a) European Convention on Human Rights, 1950; (b) Racial Equality
Directive, 2000; (c) Employment Equality Directive, 2000; (d) Gender Goods and Services Directive, 2004;
(e) Gender Employment Directive, 2006; (f) Equal Treatment Directive (proposal), 2008. http://
eur-lex. europa. cu.

Ezeala-Harrison, F., Glover, G. & Shaw-Jackson, J. 2008. Housing loan patterns toward minority borrowers
in Mississippi: analysis of some micro data evidence of redlining. The Review of Black Political Economy
35(1), 43-54.

Fadlon, Y. 2011. Statistical discrimination and the implications of employer-employee racial matches, Draft
manuscript. https://my.vanderbilt.edu/yarivfadlon.

Fairlie, R. W. 2005. An extension of the Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition technique to logit and probit models.
Journal of Economic and Social Measurement 30, 305-316.

Falk, A., Walkowitz, G. & Wirth, W 2008. Do ex-offenders face discrimination in the labor market? Because
of expected inferior reciprocity? Unpublished manuscript. http: //www.uni-graz.at.

Falk, A. & Zehnder, C. 2007. Discrimination and in-group favoritism in a citywide trust experiment. Working
Paper iewwp318, Institute for Empirical Research in Economics, University of Zurich. http://www.
iew.uzh.ch.

Fang, H. & Moro, A. 2010. Theories of statistical discrimination and affirmative action: a survey. In
Handbook of Sacial Economics, Benhabib, J., Jackson, M. O. & Bisin, A. (eds). Elsevier, vol. 1A, 134-200.

Farrington, C. P & Manning, G. 1990. Test statistics and sample size formulae for comparative binomial
trials with null hypothesis of non-zero risk difference or non-unity relative risk. Statistics in Medicine
9(12), 1447-1454.

Federal Trade Commission. 2007. Credit-based insurance scores: impacts on consumers of automobile
insurance. http: //ftc.gov.

Feltovich, N. & Papageorgiou, C. 2004. An experimental study of statistical discrimination by employers.
Southern Economic Journal 70(4), 837-849.

Fershtman, C. & Gneezy, U. 2001. Discrimination in a segmented society: an experimental approach.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(1), 351-377.

Fienberg, S. E., Krislov, 8S. H. & Straf, M. L. 1995. Understanding and evaluating statistical evidence in
litigation. Jurimetrics Journal of Law, Science, and Technology 36(1), 1-32.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
630 A. ROMEI AND S. RUGGIERI

Finkelstein, M. O. & Levin, B. (eds). 2001. Statistics for Lawyers, 2nd edn. Springer-Verlag.

Fix, M. & Tuner, M. (eds). 1999. A National Report Card on Discrimination in America: The Role of Testing.
The Urban Institute.

Flabbi, L. 2010. Prejudice and gender differentials in the US labor market in the last twenty years. Journal of
Econometrics 156(1), 190-200.

Fleiss, J. L., Levin, B. & Paik, M. C. 2003. Statistical Methods for Rates and Proportions, 3rd edn. Wiley.

Foley, M. & Smith, F. H. 2007. Consumer discrimination in professional sports: new evidence from Major
League Baseball. Applied Economics Letters 14(13), 951-955.

Fortin, N, Lemieux, T & Firpo, S. 2010. Decomposition methods in economics. Working Paper 16045,
National Bureau of Economic Research. http: //www.nber.org.

Fortowsky, E. & LaCour-Little, M. 2001. Credit scoring and disparate impact. Working Paper, Wells Fargo
Home Mortagage. http://fic.wharton.upenn.edu/fic.

Fraser, S. 2009. Is there ethnic discrimination in the UK market for small business credit? International Small
Business Journal 27(5), 583-607.

Frick, B. 2007. The football players’ labor market: empirical evidence from the major European leagues.
Scottish Journal of Political Economy 54(3), 422-446.

Frick, B. & Deutscher, C. 2009. Salary determination in the German “Bundesliga”: a panel study. IASE
Conference Paper 0811, International Association of Sports Economists.

Friedman, S., Squires, G. D. & Galvan, C. 2010. Cybersegregation in Boston and Dallas: is Neil a more
desirable tenant than Tyrone or Jorge?, Presented at the Population Association of America 2010 Annual
Meeting. http: //paa2010.princeton. edu.

Frijters, P., Shields, M. A., Theodoropoulos, N. & Wheatley Price, S. 2003. Testing for employee dis-
crimination using matched employer-employee data: theory and evidence. Discussion paper 807, Institute
for the Study of Labor (IZA). http: //ftp.iza.org.

Fryer, R. G., Pager, D. & Spenkuch, J. L. 2011. Racial disparities in job finding and offered wages. Working
Paper 17462, National Bureau of Economic Research. http: //www.nber.org.

Gabbidon, S. L., Craig, R., Okafo, N., Marzette, L. N. & Peterson, S. A. 2008. The consumer racial profiling
experiences of Black students at historically Black colleges and universities: an exploratory study. Journal
of Criminal Justice 36(4), 354-361.

Gao, B. & Berendt, B. 2011. Visual data mining for higher-level patterns: discrimination-aware data
mining and beyond. In Proceedings of Belgian Dutch Conference on Machine Learning ( Benelearn 2011),
The Hague, The Netherlands, 45-52.

Gardner, J. 2009. Deterrence externalities and racial bias in law enforcement. Working Paper 88, Carnegie
Mellon University. http://www. heinz.cmu.edu.

Gastwirth, J. L. 1984. Statistical methods for analyzing claims of employment discrimination. Industrial and
Labor Relations Review 38(1), 75-86.

Gastwirth, J. L. 1992a. Methods for assessing the sensitivity of statistical comparisons used in Title VII cases
to omitted variables. Jurimetrics Journal 33, 19-34.

Gastwirth, J. L. 1992b. Statistical reasoning in the legal setting. The American Statistician 46(1), 55-69.

Gastwirth, J. L., Krieger, A. M. & Rosenbaum, P. R. 1998. Dual and simultaneous sensitivity analysis for
matched pairs. Biometrika 85(4), 907-920.

Gellert, R., Vries, K. D., Hert, P. D. & Gutwirth, S. 2013. A comparative analysis of anti-discrimination and
data protection legislations. In Discrimination and Privacy in the Information Society, volume 3 of Studies in
Applied Philosophy, Epistemology and Rational Ethics, Custers, B. H. M., Calders, T., Schermer, B. W. &
Zarsky, T. Z. (eds). Springer, 61-89.

Gelman, A., Fagan, J. & Kiss, A. 2007. An analysis of the New York City Police Department’s “‘stop-and-
frisk’’ policy in the context of claims of racial bias. Journal of the American Statistical Association
102(479), 813-823.

Ghosh, M., Chen, M.-H., Ghosh, A. & Agresti, A. 2000. Hierarchical Bayesian analysis of binary matched
data. Statistica Sinica 10, 647-657.

Goddard, J. & Wilson, J. O. S. 2009. Racial discrimination in English professional football: evidence from an
empirical analysis of players’ career progression. Cambridge Journal of Economics 33(2), 295-316.

Goenner, C. 2010. Discrimination and mortgage lending in Boston: the effects of model uncertainty. Journal
of Real Estate Finance and Economics 40(3), 260-285.

Goldberg, M. S. 1982. Discrimination, nepotism, and long-run wage differentials. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 97(2), 307-319.

Goldberg, P. K. 1996. Dealer price discrimination in new car purchases: evidence from the consumer
expenditure survey. Journal of Political Economy 104(3), 622-654.

Goldin, C. & Rouse, C. 2000. Orchestrating impartiality: the impact of “blind” auditions on female musicians.
American Economic Review 90(4), 715-741.

Goldstein, H. 2011. Multilevel Statistical Models, 4th edn. Wiley.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
A multidisciplinary survey on discrimination analysis 631

Green, A., Carney, D., Pallin, D., Ngo, L., Raymond, K., Iezzoni, L. & Banaji, M. 2007. Implicit bias among
physicians and its prediction of thrombolysis decisions for black and white patients. Journal of General
Internal Medicine 22, 1231-1238.

Greene, W. H. 2008. Econometric Analysis, 7th edn. Prentice-Hall.

Greenwald, A. G. & Krieger, L. H. 2006. Implicit bias: scientific foundations. California Law Review 94(4),
945-967.

Grogger, J. T. 2011. Speech patterns and racial wage inequality. Journal of Human Resources 46(1), 1-25.

Grogger, J. T. & Ridgeway, G. 2006. Testing for racial profiling in traffic stops from behind a veil of
darkness. Journal of the American Statistical Association 101(475), 878-887.

Grytten, J., Skau, I. & Sorensen, R. 2011. Do expert patients get better treatment than others? Agency
discrimination and statistical discrimination in obstetrics. Journal of Health Economics 30(1), 163-180.
Gtith, W., Kocher, M. G. & Popova, V. 2010. Co-employment of permanently and temporarily employed
agents. Jena Economic Research Paper 2010-016, Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena, Max-Planck-Institute

of Economics. http: //www.econ.mpg.de.

Hajian, S. & Domingo-Ferrer, J. 2012. A methodology for direct and indirect discrimination prevention in
data mining. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, page to appear.

Hajian, S., Monreale, A., Pedreschi, D., Domingo-Ferrer, J. & Giannotti, F. 2012. Injecting discrimination
and privacy awareness into pattern discovery. In Proceedings of the IEEE ICDM 2012 International Workshop
on Discrimination and Privacy-Aware Data Mining (DPADM), Vrecken J., Ling C., Zaki M. J., Siebes A.,
Yu J. X., Goethals B., Webb G. L & Wu X. (eds). IEEE Computer Society, 360-367.

Hamermesh, D. & Biddle, J. 1994. Beauty and the labor market. The American Economic Review 84(5),
1174-1194.

Han, S. 2011. Creditor learning and discrimination in lending. Journal of Financial Services Research 40(\-2),
1-27.

Hanson, A. & Hawley, Z. 2011. Do landlords discriminate in the rental housing market? Evidence from an
Internet field experiment in US. cities. Urban Economics 70(2-3), 99-114.

Hanssen, F. A. & Andersen, T. 1999. Has discrimination lessened over time? A test using baseball’s all-star
vote. Economic Inquiry 37(2), 326-352.

Hardin, J. & Hilbe, J. 2007. Generalized Linear Models and Extensions, 2nd edn. Stata Press.

Harford, T. 2008. The Logic of Life. The Random House Publishing Group.

Harrison, G. W. & List, J. A. 2004. Field experiments. American Economic Literature 42(4), 1009-1055.

Heckman, J. 1998. Detecting discrimination. The Journal of Economic Perspectives 12(2), 101-116.

Heckman, J. & Siegelman, P. 1993. The Urban Institute audit studies: their methods and findings. In Clear
and Convincing Evidence: Measures of discrimination in America, Fix, M. & Struyk, R. (eds). The Urban
Institute Press, 187-248.

Hellerstein, J. K., Neumark, D. & Troske, K. R. 2002. Market forces and sex discrimination. Journal of
Human Resources 37(2), 353-380.

Hernandez, J. 2009. Redlining revisited: mortgage lending patterns in sacramento 1930-2004. International
Journal of Urban and Regional Research 33(2), 291-313.

Hersch, P. L. 2010. Customer discrimination against black Major League Baseball pitchers reconsidered.
Applied Economics Letters 17(2), 205-208.

Hildebrandt, M. & Gutwirth, S. (eds). 2008. Profiling the European Citizen: Cross-Disciplinary Perspectives. Springer.

Hillier, A. E. 2003. Spatial analysis of historical redlining: a methodological explanation. Journal of Housing
Research 14(1), 137-168.

Hinnerich, B. T., Héglin, E. & Johannesson, M. 2011. Are boys discriminated in Swedish high schools?
Economics of Education Review 30(4), 682-690.

Hoeting, J., Madigan, D., Raftery, A. & Volinsky, C. 1999. Bayesian model averaging: a tutorial. Statistical
Science 14(4), 382-401.

Hogler, R. L., Henle, C. & Bemus, C. 1998. Internet recruiting and employment discrimination: a legal
perspective. Human Resource Management Review 8(2), 149-164.

Holloway, R. 8. & Wyly, E. K. 2001. “The color of money” expanded: geographically contingent mortgage
lending in Atlanta. Journal of Housing Research 12(1), 55-90.

Holmes, P. 2011. New evidence of salary discrimination in Major League Baseball. Labour Economics 18(3),
320-331.

Holzer, H. J. & thlanfeldt, K. R. 1998. Customer discrimination and employment outcomes for minority
workers. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(3), 835-867.

Holzer, H. J. & Neumark, D. 2004. The Economics of Affirmative Action. Edward Elgar.

Holzer, H. J. & Neumark, D. 2006. Affirmative action: What do we know? Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management 25(2), 463-490.

Holzer, H. J., Raphael, S. & Stoll, M. A. 2006. Perceived criminality, criminal background checks, and the
racial hiring practices of employers. Journal of Law & Economics 49(2), 451-480.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
632 A. ROMEI AND S. RUGGIERI

Hu, L. & Taber, C. 2010. Displacement, asymmetric information and heterogeneous human capital. Journal
of Labor Economics 29(1), 113-152.

Hunter, W. C. & Walker, M. B. 1996. The cultural affinity hypothesis and mortgage lending decisions.
The Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics 13(1), 57-70.

Ioannides, Y. M. 2008. Social interactions (empirics). In The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics,
Durlauf, S. N. & Blume, L. E. (eds). Palgrave Macmillan.

Toannides, Y. M. & Loury, L. D. 2004. Job information networks, neighborhood effects, and inequality.
Journal of Economic Literature 42(4), 1056-1093.

James, D. R. & Tauber, K. E. 1985. Measures of segregation. Sociological Methodology 13, 1-32.

Jann, B. 2008. The Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition for linear regression models. Stata Journal 8(4), 453-479.

Jayasinghe, U. W., Marsh, H. W. & Bond, N. W. 2003. A multilevel cross-classified modeling approach to
peer-review of grant proposals. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society 166(3), 279-300.

Jewell, R. T., Brown, R. W. & Miles, S. E. 2002. Measuring discrimination in Major League Baseball:
evidence from the baseball hall of fame. Applied Economics 34(2), 167-177.

Jobard, F. & Lévy, R. 2011. Racial profiling: the Parisian police experience. Canadian Journal of Criminology
and Criminal Justice 53(1), 87-93.

Jones, M. K. 2008. Disability and the labour market: a review of the empirical evidence. Journal of Economic
Studies 35(5), 405-424.

Juhn, C., Murphy, K. M. & Pierce, B. 1991. Accounting for the slowdown in black-white wage convergence.
In Workers and Their Wages: Changing Patterns in the United States, Kosters, M. H. (ed.). AEI Press,
107-143.

Kaas, L. & Manger, C. 2012. Ethnic discrimination in Germany’s labour market: a field experiment. German
Economic Review 13(1), 1-20.

Kahn, L. M. 1991a. Customer discrimination and affirmative action. Economic Inquiry 29(3), 555-571.

Kahn, L. M. 1991b. Discrimination in professional sports: a survey of the literature. Industrial and Labor
Relations Review 44(3), 395-418.

Kahn, L. M. 2000. The sports business as a labor market laboratory. Journal of Economic Perspectives 14(3),
75-94.

Kahn, L. M. 2009. The economics of discrimination: Evidence from basketball. Discussion Paper 3987,
Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA). nttp://ftp.iza-org.

Kamiran, F. & Calders, T. 2012. Data preprocessing techniques for classification without discrimination.
Knowledge and Information Systems 33, 1-33.

Kamiran, F., Calders, T. & Pechenizkiy, M. 2010. Discrimination aware decision tree learning. In Proceedings
of the IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM 2010}, Webb G. I., Liu B., Zhang C.,
Gunopulos D. & Wu X. (eds). IEEE Computer Society, 869-874.

Kamiran, F., Karim, A. & Zhang, X. 2012. Decision theory for discrimination-aware classification. In
Proceedings of the [EEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM 2012), Zaki M. J., Siebes A.,
Yu J. X., Goethals B., Webb G. I. & Wu X. (eds). IEEE Computer Society, 924-929.

Kamishima, T., Akaho, S. & Sakuma, J. 2012. Fairness-aware classifier with prejudice remover regularizer. In
Proceedings of the European Conference on Machine Learning and on Principles and Practice of Knowledge
Discovery in Databases (ECML-PKDD 2012), Flach P. A., De Bie T. & Cristianini N. (eds). Lecture
Notes in Computer Science 7524, 35-50. Springer.

Kang, J. & Lane, K. 2010. Seeing through colorblindness: implicit bias and the law. UCLA Law Review 58(2),
465-520.

Kanter, R. M. 1977. Some effects of proportions on group life: skewed sex ratios and responses to token
women. American Journal of Sociology 82(5), 965-990.

Kapsalis, C. 1982. A new measure of wage discrimination. Economics Letters 9(3), 287-293.

Kapsalis, C. 2010. Wage discrimination: The Case for Reverse Regression. Technical report 27331, University
Library of Munich. nttp: //mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de.

Kaye, D. H. & Aickin, M. (eds). 1992. Statistical Methods in Discrimination Litigation. Marcel Dekker Inc.

Kaye, D. H. & Freedman, D. A. 2011. Reference guide on statistics. In Reference Manual on Scientific
Evidence, 3rd edn. 83-178. Federal Judicial Center.

Keane, M. P. 1994. A computationally practical simulation estimator for panel data. Econometrica 62(1),
95-116.

Kessler, R., Bechet, N., Moreno, J. M. T., Roche, M. & El-Béze, M. 2009. Job offer management: how
improve the ranking of candidates. In Proceedings of the International Symposium on Foundations of
Intelligent Systems (ISMTS 2009}, Rauch, J., Ras, Z. W., Berka, P. & Elomaa, T. (eds). Lecture Notes in
Computer Science 5722, 431-441. Springer.

Killingsworth, M. R. 1993. Analyzing employment discrimination: from the seminar room to the courtroom.
American Economic Review 83(2), 67-72.

Kim, K.-H. 2007. Favoritism and reverse discrimination. European Economic Review 51(1), 101-123.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
A multidisciplinary survey on discrimination analysis 633

Kim, Y. C. 2009. Lifetime Network Externality and the Dynamics of Group Inequality. Technical report 18767,
University Library of Munich. nttp://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de.

Knowles, J., Persico, N. & Todd, P. 2001. Racial bias in motor vehicle searches: theory and evidence. Journal
of Political Economy 1091), 203-229.

Koenker, R. 2005. Quantile Regression. Cambridge University Press.

Korffer, B. & Meints, M. 2008. Profiling of customers and consumers — customer loyalty programs and
scoring practices. In Profiling the European Citizen: Cross-Disciplinary Perspectives, Hildebrandt, M. &
Gutwirth, S. (eds). Springer, 201-215.

Kuebler, M. 2012. Lending in the modern era: does racial composition of neighborhoods matter when
individuals seek home financing? A pilot study in New England. City & Community 11(1), 31-50.

Kuhn, P. J. & Shen, K. 2010. Gender discrimination in job ads: theory and evidence. Discussion Paper 5195,
Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA). nttp://ftp.iza.org.

Kunze, A. 2008. Gender wage gap studies: consistency and decomposition. Empirical Economics 35(1), 63-76.

LaCour-Little, M. 1996. Application of reverse regression to Boston Federal Reserve data refutes claims of
discrimination. Journal of Real Estate Research 11(1), 1-12.

LaCour-Little, M. 1999. Discrimination in mortgage lending: a critical review of the literature. Journal of
Real Estate Literature 7(1), 15-49.

Lahey, J. N. & Beasley, R. A. 2009. Computerizing audit studies. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization
70(3), 508-514.

Lang, K. & Lehmann, J.-Y. K. 2011. Racial discrimination in the labor market: theory and empirics.
Working Paper 17450, National Bureau of Economic Research. http: //www.nber.org.

Lang, K. & Manove, M. 2011. Education and labor market discrimination. American Economic Review
101(4), 1467-1496.

Lang, W. W. & Nakamura, L. I. 1993. A model of redlining. Journal of Urban Economics 33(2), 223-234.

Lange, F. 2007. The speed of employer learning. Journal of Labor Economics 25(1), 1-35.

Lee, J. 2009. American Idol: evidence on same-race preferences. The Berkeley Electronic Journal of Economic
Analysis & Policy 9(1), Article 28.

Leonard, J. S., Levine, D. I. & Giuliano, L. 2010. Customer discrimination. The Review of Economics and
Statistics 9203), 670-678.

Leopold, N. & Meints, M. 2008. Profiling in employment situations (fraud). In Profiling the European
Citizen: Cross-Disciplinary Perspectives, Hildebrandt, M. & Gutwirth, S. (eds). Springer, 236-257.

Lerner, N. 2003. Group Rights and Discrimination in International Law, 2nd edn. Martinus Nijhoff Publishers.

Lerner, R. & Nagai, A. K. 2000. Reverse discrimination by the numbers. Journal Academic Questions 13(3),
71-84.

LeSage, J. P. & Pace, R. K. (eds). 2009. Introduction to Spatial Econometrics. Chapman and Hall/CRC.

Leung, M. H. & Kupper, L. L. 1981. Comparisons of confidence intervals for attributable risk. Biometrics
37(2), 293-302.

Levine, R., Levkov, A. & Rubinstein, Y. 2008. Racial discrimination and competition. Working Paper 14273,
National Bureau of Economic Research. http: //www.nber.org.

Levitt, S. D. 2004. Testing theories of discrimination: evidence from Weakest Link. Journal of Law &
Economics 47(2), 431-452.

Levitt, S. D. & List, J. A. 2007. What do laboratory experiments measuring social preferences reveal about
the real world? Journal of Economic Perspectives 21(2), 153-174.

Ley, T. J. & Hamilton, B. H. 2008. The gender gap in NIH grant applications. Science 322(5907), 1472-1474.

Li, J. & Yang, Q. 2007. Strong compound-risk factors: efficient discovery through emerging patterns and
contrast sets. IEEE Transactions on Information Technology in Biomedicine 11(5), 544-552.

Lieli, R. P. & White, H. 2010. The construction of empirical credit scoring rules based on maximization
principles. Journal of Econometrics 157(1), 110-119.

List, J. A. 2004. The nature and extent of discrimination in the marketplace: evidence from the field. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(1), 49-89.

List, J. A. 2006. Friend or foe? A natural experiment of the prisoner’s dilemma. Review of Economics and
Statistics 883), 463-471.

Longhofer, S. D. & Peters, S. R. 1999. Why is mortgage discrimination illegal? A fresh look at the mortgage
discrimination debate. Regulation, Cato Institute 22(4), 28-36.

Luong, B. T. 2011. Generalized Discrimination Discovery on Semi-structured Data Supported by Ontology,
Apte C., Ghosh J. & Smyth P. (eds). PhD thesis, IMT Institute for Advanced Studies. Lucca, Italy.
Luong, B. T., Ruggieri, S. & Turini, F. 2011. k-NN as an implementation of situation testing for
discrimination discovery and prevention. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD International Conference on

Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD 2011). ACM, 502-510.

Makkonen, T. 2002. Compound and intersectional discrimination: bringing the experiences of the most

marginalized to the fore. Unpublished manuscript, Institute for Human Rights, Abo Alademi University.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
634 A. ROMEI AND S. RUGGIERI

Makkonen, T. 2006. Measuring discrimination: data collection and the EU equality law. European Network
of Legal Experts in Anti-Discrimination. http: / /www.migpolgroup.com.

Makkonen, T. 2007. European handbook on equality data. European Commission, Directorate-General for
Employment, Social Affairs and Equal Opportunities, Unit G.4. http: / /pookshop. europa. eu.

Marsh, H. W. 2009. Gender effects in the peer reviews of grant proposals: a comprehensive meta-analysis
comparing traditional and multilevel approaches. Review of Educational Research 79(3), 1290-1326.

Marsh, H. W., Jayasinghe, U. W. & Bond, N. W. 2008. Improving the peer-review process for grant
applications: reliability, validity, bias, and generalizability. American Psychologist 63(3), 160-168.

Marshall, R. 1974. The economics of racial discrimination: a survey. Journal of Economic Literature 12(3),
849-871.

Massey, D. S. & Lundy, G. 2001. Use of Black English and racial discrimination in housing markets. Urban
Affairs Review 36(4), 452-469.

McCabe, G. P. 1992. Regression analysis in discrimination cases. In Statistical Methods in Discrimination
Litigation, Kaye, D. H. & Aickin, M. (eds). Marcel Dekker Inc., 69-84.

McCullagh, P. & Nelder, J. A. 1989. Generalized Linear Models, 2nd edn. Chapman and Hall.

McGarrity, J., Palmer, H. & Poitras, M. 1999. Consumer racial discrimination: a reassessment of the market
for baseball cards. Journal of Labor Research 20(2), 247-258.

McGinnity, F., Nelson, J., Lunn, P. & Quinn, E. 2009. Discrimination in recruitment-evidence from a field
experiment. Report, The Equality Authority and The Economic and Social Research Institute. nttp://
www.esri.ie.

Mcguire, T. G., Ayanian, J. Z., Ford, D. E., Henke, R. E. M., Rost, K. M. & Zaslavsky, A. M. 2008. Testing
for statistical discrimination by race/ethnicity in panel data for depression treatment in primary care.
Health Research and Educational Trust 43(2), 531-551.

Mobius, M. & Rosenblat, T. 2006. Why beauty matters. American Economic Review 96, 222-235.

Montgomery, J. D. 1991. Social networks and labor-market outcomes: toward an economic analysis.
American Economic Review 81(5), 1407-1418.

Montgomery, J. D. 1994. Weak ties, employment, and inequality: an equilibrium analysis. American Journal
of Sociology 995), 1212-1236.

Moreno, M.., Nopo, H., Saavedra, J. & Torero, M. 2004. Gender and racial discrimination in hiring: a pseudo
audit study for three selected occupations in metropolitan Lima. Working Paper 321, Econometric
Society. http: //econpapers.repec.org.

Moro, A. & Norman, P. 2004. A general equilibrium model of statistical discrimination. Journal of Economic
Theory 114(1), 1-30.

Munnell, A. H., Tootell, G. M. B., Browne, L. E. & McEneaney, J. 1996. Mortgage lending in Boston:
interpreting HMDA data. American Economic Review 86(1), 25-53.

Muravyev, A., Talavera, O. & Schafer, D. 2009. Entrepreneurs’ gender and financial constraints: evidence
from international data. Journal of Comparative Economics 37(2), 270-286.

Mutz, R., Bornmann, L. & Daniel, H.-D. 2012. Does gender matter in grant peer review? An empirical
investigation using the example of the Austrian Science Fund. Journal of Psychology 220, 121-129.

Myers, C. K., Bellows, M., Fakhoury, H., Hale, D., Hall, A. & Ofman, K. 2010. Ladies first? A field study of
discrimination in Coffee Shops. Applied Economics 42(14), 1761-1769.

Nardinelli, C. & Simon, C. 1990. Customer racial discrimination in the market for memorabilia: the case of
baseball. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 105(3), 575-595.

Neal, D. A. & Johnson, W. R. 1996. The role of premarket factors in black-white wage differences. Journal of
Political Economy 104(5), 869-895.

Neumark, D. 1988. Employers’ discriminatory behavior and the estimation of wage discrimination. Journal of
Human Resources 23(3), 279-295.

Neumark, D. 2010. Detecting discrimination in audit and correspondence studies. Working Paper 16448,
National Bureau of Economic Research. http: //www.nber.org.

Neumayer, E. & de Soysa, I. 2007. Globalisation, women’s economic rights and forced labour. The World
Economy 30(10), 1510-1535.

Newcombe, R. G. 1998. Interval estimation for the difference between independent proportions: comparison
of eleven methods. Statistics in Medicine 17(8), 873-889.

Newman, D. M. 2008. Sociology: Exploring the Architecture of Everyday Life, 7th edn. Pine Forge Press.

Nunley, J. M., Owens, M. F. & Howard, R. S. 2011. The effects of competition and information on racial
discrimination: evidence from a field experiment. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 80(3),
670-679.

Oaxaca, R. L. 1973. Male-female wage differential in urban labour markets. International Economic Review
14(3), 693-705.

Oaxaca, R. L. & Ransom, M. R. 1994. On discrimination and the decomposition of wage differentials.
Journal of Econometrics 61(1), 5-21.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
A multidisciplinary survey on discrimination analysis 635

Oostendorp, R. 2009. Globalization and the gender wage gap. World Bank Economic Review 23(1), 141-161.

Paetzold, R. L., Willborn, S. L. & Baldus, D. C. 1994. The Statistics of Discrimination: Using Statistical
Evidence in Discrimination Cases. Shepard’s/McGraw-Hill.

Pager, D. 2007. The use of field experiments for studies of employment discrimination: contributions,
critiques, and directions for the future. The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social
Science 609(1), 104-133.

Pager, D. & Quillian, L. 2005. Walking the talk? What employers say versus what they do. American
Sociological Review 70(3), 355-380.

Pager, D., Western, B. & Bonikowski, B. 2009. Discrimination in a low-wage labor market: a field experiment.
Discussion Paper 4469, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA). http: //ftp.iza.org.

Palmer, M. & King, R. 2006. Has salary discrimination really disappeared from Major League Baseball?
Eastern Economic Journal 3202), 285-297.

Parrett, M. 2011. Customer discrimination in restaurants: dining frequency matters. Journal of Labor
Research 32(2), 87-112.

Patacchini, E., Ragusa, G. & Zenou, Y. 2012. Unexplored dimensions of discrimination in Europe: religion,
homosexuality and physical appearance. The 14th European Conference of the Fondazione R. DeBenedetti
(FRDB). http://www. frdb.org.

Pearl, J. 2009a. Causal inference in statistics: an overview. Statistics Surveys 3, 96-146.

Pearl, J. 2009b. Causality: Models, Reasoning, and Inference, 2nd edn. Cambridge University Press.

Pedreschi, D., Ruggieri, S. & Turini, F. 2008. Discrimination-aware data mining. In Proceedings of the ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD 2008), Li Y., Liu B. &
Sarawagi S. (eds). ACM, 560-568.

Pedreschi, D., Ruggieri, S. & Turini, F. 2009. Measuring discrimination in socially-sensitive decision records.
In Proceedings of the SIAM International Conference on Data Mining (SDM 2009). SIAM, 581-592.
Pedreschi, D., Ruggieri, S. & Turini, F. 2012. A study of top-k measures for discrimination discovery.
In Proceedings of ACM International Symposium on Applied Computing (SAC 2012), Ossowski S. &

Lecca P. (eds). ACM, 126-131.

Persico, N. & Todd, P. 2005. Passenger profiling, imperfect screening, and airport security. American
Economic Review 95(2), 127-131.

Phelps, E. S. 1972. The statistical theory of racism and sexism. American Economic Review 62(4), 659-661.

Phillips-Patrick, F. J. & Rossi, C. V. 1996. Statistical evidence of mortgage redlining? A cautionary tale.
Journal of Real Estate Research 11(1), 13-24.

Pickerill, M. J., Mosher, C. & Pratt, T. 2009. Search and seizure, racial profiling, and traffic stops: a disparate
impact framework. Law & Policy 31(1), 1-30.

Piette, M. J. & White, P. F. 1999. Approaches for dealing with small sample sizes in employment dis-
crimination litigation. Journal of Forensic Economics 12(1), 43-56.

Pinkston, J. C. 2006. A test of screening discrimination with employer learning. Industrial and Labor Relations
Review 59(2), 267-284.

Pope, D. G. & Sydnor, J. R. 2007. Implicit statistical discrimination in predictive models. Working Paper
2007-09-11, Risk Management and Decision Processes Center, The Wharton School of the University of
Pennsylvania. http: //opim.wharton.upenn.edu.

Pope, D. G. & Sydnor, J. R. 2011. What’s in a picture? Evidence of discrimination from Prosper.com. Journal
of Human Resources 46(1), 53-92.

Primm, E., Piquero, N. L., Piquero, A. R. & Regoli, R. M. 2011. Investigating customer racial discrimination
in the secondary baseball card market. Sociological Inquiry 81(1), 110-132.

Quillian, L. 2006. New approaches to understanding racial prejudice and discrimination. Annual Review of
Sociology 32(1), 299-328.

Quintanar, S. M. 2009. Man vs. machine: an investigation of speeding ticket disparities based on gender and
race. Departmental Working Paper 2009-16. Department of Economics, Louisiana State University.
http: //bus.1lsu. edu.

Rachlis, M. B. & Yezer, A. M. J. 1993. Serious flaws in statistical tests for discrimination in mortgage
markets. Journal of Housing Research 2(4), 315-336.

Racine, J. & Rilstone, P. 1995. The reverse regression problem: statistical paradox or artefact of misspecification?
The Canadian Journal of Economics 283), 502-531.

RAND. 2005. Is there gender bias in federal grant programs?, RAND Infrastructure, Safety, and Environment
Brief RB-9147-NSF. http: //rand.org.

Raudenbush, S. W. & Bryk, A. S. 2002. Hierarchical Linear Models, 2nd edn. Sage Publications.

Reardon, S. F. & Firebaugh, G. 2002. Measures of multigroup segregation. Sociological Methodology 32(1), 33-67.

Reid, C. & Laderman, E. 2009. The untold costs of subprime lending: examining the links among higher-
priced lending, foreclosures and race in California. Community Development Investment Center Working
Paper 2009-09, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
636 A. ROMEI AND S. RUGGIERI

Riach, P. A. & Rich, J. 2002. Field experiments of discrimination in the market place. The Economic Journal
112(483), 480-518.

Riach, P. A. & Rich, J. 2004. Deceptive field experiments of discrimination: are they ethical? Kyklos 57(3),
457-470.

Riach, P. A. & Rich, J. 2006. An experimental investigation of sexual discrimination in hiring in the English
labor market. The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy 6(2), Article 1.

Ridgeway, G. 2006. Assessing the effect of race bias in post-traffic stop outcomes using propensity scores.
Journal of Quantitative Criminology 22(1), 1-29.

Ridgeway, G. & MacDonald, J. M. 2009. Doubly robust internal benchmarking and false discovery rates for
detecting racial bias in police stops. Journal of the American Statistical Association 104(486), 661-668.
Rédin, M. & Ozcan, G. 2011. Is it how you look or speak that matters? An experimental study exploring the
mechanisms of ethnic discrimination. Research Papers in Economics 2011-12, Stockholm University,

Department of Economics. http: //www2.ne.su.se.

Rogers, T. & McKane, A. J. 2011. A unified framework for Schelling’s model of segregation. Journal of
Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment 2011(7), P07006.

Romei, A., Ruggieri, S. & Turini, F. 2012. Discovering gender discrimination in project funding. In Proceedings of
the IEEE ICDM 2012 International Workshop on Discrimination and Privacy-Aware Data Mining (DPADM).
IEEE Computer Society, 394-401.

Rooth, D.-O. 2009. Obesity, attractiveness, and differential treatment in hiring: a field experiment. Journal of
Human Resources 44(3), 710-735.

Rorive, I. 2009. Proving discrimination cases — the role of situation testing, Centre For Equal Rights &
Migration Policy Group. http: / /www.migpolgroup.com.

Roscigno, V., Karafin, D. L. & Tester, G. 2009. The complexities and processes of racial housing discrimination.
Social Problems 56(1), 49-69.

Rosenbaum, P. R. & Rubin, D. B. 1983. The central role of the propensity score in observational studies for
causal effects. Biometrika 70(1), 41-55.

Ross, S. L. 1996. Mortgage lending discrimination and racial differences in loan default. Journal of Housing
Research 7(1), 117-126.

Ross, S. L. 1997. Mortgage lending discrimination and racial differences in loan default: a simulation
approach. Journal of Housing Research 8(2), 277-297.

Ross, S. L. & Tootell, G. M. B. 2004. Redlining, the community reinvestment act, and private mortgage
insurance. Journal of Urban Economics 55(2), 278-297.

Ross, S. L. & Yinger, J. 1999. The default approach to studying mortgage discrimination: a rebuttal.
In Mortgage lending discrimination: A review of existing evidence, Turner, M. A. & Skidmore, F. (eds).
The Urban Institute, 107-127.

Ross, S. L. & Yinger, J. 2002. The Color of Credit: Mortgage Discrimination, Research Methodology, and
Fair-Lending Enforcement. The MIT Press.

Ross, S. L. & Yinger, J. 2006. Uncovering discrimination: a comparison of the methods used by scholars and
civil rights enforcement officials. American Law and Economics Review 8(3), 562-614.

Rubin, D. B. 2005. Causal effects using potential outcomes: design, modeling, decisions. Journal of the
American Statistical Association 100(469), 322-331.

Ruggieri, 8., Pedreschi, D. & Turini, F. 2010a. Data mining for discrimination discovery. ACM Transactions
on Knowledge Discovery from Data 4(2), Article 9.

Ruggieri, S., Pedreschi, D. & Turini, F. 2010b. DCUBE: Discrimination discovery in databases. In Proceedings of
the ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data (SIGMOD 2010). ACM, 1127-1130.

Ruggieri, S., Pedreschi, D. & Turini, F. 2010c. Integrating induction and deduction for finding evidence of
discrimination. Artificial Intelligence and Law 18(1), 1-43.

Rugh, J. S. & Massey, D. S. 2010. Racial segregation and the American foreclosure crisis. American
Sociological Review 75(5), 629-651.

Sandstrém, U. & Hallsten, M. 2008. Persistent nepotism in peer-review. Scientometrics 74(2), 175-189.

Sano, S. 2009. Testing the taste-based discrimination hypothesis: evidence from data on japanese listed firms.
Japan Labor Review 6(1), 36-50.

Schaefer, K. & Visser, M. L. 2004. Reverse regression and orthogonal regression in employment dis-
crimination analysisn. Journal of Forensic Economics 163), 283-298.

Scheinkman, J. A. 2008. Social interactions (theory). In The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, Durlauf,
S.N. & Blume, L. E. (eds). Palgrave Macmillan.

Schelling, T. C. 1971. Dynamic models of segregation. Journal of Mathematical Sociology 1, 143-186.

Schiek, D., Waddington, L. & Bell, M. (eds). 2007. Cases, Materials and Text on National, Supranational and
International Non-Discrimination Law. Hart Publishing.

Schill, M. H. & Wachter, S. M. 1993. A tale of two cities: racial and ethnic geographic disparities in home
mortgage lending in Boston and Philadelphia. Journal of Housing Research 4(2), 245-275.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
A multidisciplinary survey on discrimination analysis 637

Schreurs, W., Hildebrandt, M., Kindt, E. & Vanfleteren, M. 2008. The role of data protection law and
non-discrimination law in group profiling in the private sector. In Profiling the European Citizen: Cross-
Disciplinary Perspectives, Hildebrandt, M. & Gutwirth, S. (eds). Springer, 258-287.

Shavers, V. L., Fagan, P., Jones, D., Klein, W. M. P., Boyington, J., Moten, C. & Rorie, E. 2012. The state of
research on racial/ethnic discrimination in the receipt of health care. American Journal of Public Health
102(5), 953-966.

Sheskin, D. J. (ed.). 2004. Handbook of Parametric and Non-Parametric Statistical Procedure, 3rd edn.
Chapman & Hall/CRC.

Shoben, E. 1992. Defining the relevant population in employment discrimination cases. In Statistical Methods
in Discrimination Litigation, Kaye, D. H. & Aickin, M. (eds). Marcel Dekker Inc., 55-68.

Siegel, S. & Castellan, N. J. 1988. Nonparametric statistics for the behavioral sciences, 2nd edn. McGraw-Hill.

Siegelman, P. 1999. Racial discrimination in ’everyday’ commercial transactions: What do we know, what do
we need to know, and how can we find out?. In A National Report Card on Discrimination in America: The
Role of Testing, Fix, M. & Tuner, M. (eds). The Urban Institute.

Silverman, R. M. 2005. Redlining in a majority black city?: Mortgage lending and the racial composition of
Detroit neighborhoods. The Western Journal of Black Studies 29(1), 531-541.

Silverman, R. M. 2008. Mortgage lending disparities in metropolitan Buffalo: implications for community
reinvestment policy. Journal of Regional Analysis & Police 38(1), 36-44.

Slonim, R. & Guillen, P. 2010. Gender selection discrimination: evidence from a trust game. Journal of
Economic Behavior & Organization 76(2), 385-405.

Sowell, T. (ed.). 2005. Affirmative Action Around the World: An Empirical Analysis. Yale University Press.

Squires, G. D. 2003. Racial profiling, insurance style: insurance redlining and the uneven development of
metropolitan areas. Journal of Urban Affairs 25(4), 391-410.

Squires, G. D., Hyra, D. S. & Renner, R. N. 2009. Segregation and the subprime lending crisis. Briefing paper
244, Economic Policy Institute. http: //www.epi.org.

Steele, C. M. & Aronson, J. 1995. Stereotype threat and the intellectual test performance of African
Americans. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 695), 797-811.

Stephens-Davidowitz, S. I. 2012. The effects of racial animus on a black presidential candidate: using Google
search data to find what surveys miss. Working paper, Harvard University, Department of Economics.
http://ssrn.com.

Sugrue, T. J. & Fairley, W. B. 1983. A case of unexamined assumptions: the use and misuse of the statistical
analysis of Castaneda/Hazelwood in discrimination litigation. Boston College Law Review 24(4), 925-960.

Tian, M., Tang, M. L., Ng, H. K. T. & Chan, P. S. 2008. Confidence intervals for the risk ratio under inverse
sampling. Statistics in Medicine 27(17), 3301-3324.

Tillyer, R., Engel, R. S. & Cherkauskas, J. C. 2010. Best practices in vehicle stop data collection and analysis.
Journal of Police Strategies and Management 33(1), 69-92.

Tillyer, R., Engel, R. S. & Wooldredge, J. 2008. The intersection of racial profiling research and the law.
Journal of Criminal Justice 36(2), 138-153.

Tobler, C. 2008. Limits and potential of the concept of indirect discrimination. European Network of Legal
Experts in Anti-Discrimination. http: / /www.migpolgroup.com.

Tootell, G. M. B. 1996. Redlining in Boston: Do mortgage lenders discriminate against neighborhoods? The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(4), 1049-1079.

Tsao, T.-Y. & Pearlman, A. 2010. Decomposition of the black-white wage differential in the physician market.
Economics Working paper wp588, The Levy Economics Institute. http://www. levyinstitute.org.

Turner, M. A. & Ross, S. L. 2005. How racial discrimination affects the search for housing. In The Geography
of Opportunity, de Souza Briggs, X. (ed). Brookings Institution Press, 81-100.

Turner, M. A., Ross, S. L., Galster, G. C. & Yinger, J. 2002. Discrimination in Metropolitan Housing Markets:
National Results from Phase I of HDS2000. Urban Institute, Dep. Hous. Urban Dev. nttp: //www.urban.org.

Turner, M. A. & Skidmore, F. (eds). 1999. Mortgage lending discrimination: A review of existing evidence.
The Urban Institute. http: //www.urban.org.

UK Legislation. 2012. (a) Sex Discrimination Act, 1975, (b) Race Relation Act, 1976, (c) Equality Act, 2010.
http: //www.statutelaw.gov.uk.

UNESCO 2007. Science, Technology and Gender: An International Report, 4th edn. UNESCO Publishing.

United Nations Legislation. 2012. (a) Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948, (b) International
Covenant for Civil and Political Rights, 1966, (c) International Covenant on Ecomomic, Social
and Cultural Rights, 1966, (d) Convention on the Elimination of All forms of Racial Discrimination,
1966, (e) Convention on the Elimination of All forms of Discrimination Against Women, 1979.
http: //www.ohchr.org.

US Federal Legislation. 2012. (a) Equal Credit Opportunity Act, 1974; (b) Fair Housing Act, 1968;
(c) Employment Act, 1967; (d) Equal Pay Act, 1963; (e) Pregnancy Discrimination Act, 1978; (f) Civil
Right Act, 1964. nttp: / /www.eeoc.gov.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
638 A. ROMEI AND S. RUGGIERI

Zliobaitye, I., Kamiran, F. & Calders, T. 2011. Handling conditional discrimination. In Proceedings of the
IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM 2011}. IEEE Computer Society, 992-1001.

van der Leij, M., Rolfe, M. & Toomet, O. 2009. Social networks and the economic performance of minorities.
Research paper, EQUALSOC Network of Excellence. nttp: //equalsoc.org.

Vicki, B., Ellen, I. & Madar, J. 2009. The high cost of segregation: exploring racial disparities in high-cost
lending. Fordham Urban Law Journal 36(3), 361-393.

Wang, S.-Y 2010. Statistical discrimination, productivity and the height of immigrants. Working paper 3344,
eSocialSciences. http: //www.esocialsciences.org.

Ward, M. D. & Gleditsch, K. S. (eds). 2008. Spatial Regression Models Quantitative Applications in the
Social Sciences. Sage Publications Inc..

Weichselbaumer, D. & Winter-Ebmer, R. 2005. A meta-analysis of the international gender wage gap.
Journal of Economic Surveys 19(3), 479-511.

Weichselbaumer, D. & Winter-Ebmer, R. 2007. The effects of competition and equal treatment laws on
gender wage differentials. Economic Policy 22, 235-287.

Weller, C. E. 2008. Credit access, the costs of credit and credit market discrimination. Working paper 171,
Political Economy Research Institute, University of Massachusetts at Amherst. http: //www.peri.
umass.edu.

Wenneras, C. & Wold, A. 1997. Nepotism and sexism in peer-review. Nature 387(5), 341-343.

Whiteside, M. M. & Narayanan, A. 1989. Reverse regression, collinearity, and employment discrimination.
Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 7(3), 403-406.

Whitley, B. E. & Kite, M. E. 2009. The Psychology of Prejudice and Discrimination, 2nd edn. Wadsworth
Publishing.

Whitney, M. 2008. The statistical evidence of racial profiling in traffic stops and searches: rethinking the use
of statistics to prove discriminatory intent. Boston College Law Review 49(1), 263-299.

Wilson, D. P. & Ying, Y. H. 2003. Nationality preferences for labour in the international football industry.
Applied Economics 35(14), 1551-1559.

Wilson, R. 2004. Where the elite teach, it’s still a man’s world. The Chronicle of Higher Education 51(15).

Wingate, P. H. & Thornton, G. C. 2000. Statistics and employment discrimination law: an interdisciplinary
review. In Research in Personnel and Human Resources Management, Martocchio, J., Liao, H. & Joshi, A.
(eds). Emerald Group Publishing Ltd, vol. 19, 295-337.

Wyly, E. K., Moos, M., Foxcroft, H. & Kabahizi, E. 2008. Subprime mortgage segmentation in the American
urban system. Journal of Economic and Social Geography 991), 3-23.

Yamagishi, T., Jin, N. & Kiyonari, T. 1999. Bounded generalized reciprocity: ingroup boasting and ingroup
favoritism. In Advances in Group Processes, Lawler, E. J. & Macy, M. W. (eds). Jai Press Inc., vol. 16,
161-197.

Yang, C.-H & Lin, H.-Y. 2012. Is there salary discrimination by nationality in the NBA? Foreign talent or
foreign market. Journal of Sports Economics 13(1), 53-75.

Yezer, A. M. 2010. A review of statistical problems in the measurement of mortgage market discrimination
and credit risk. Report, Research Institute for Housing America. http: //www.housingamerica.org.
Yinger, J. 1998. Evidence on discrimination in consumer markets. The Journal of Economic Perspectives 12(2),

23-40.

Yu, B. & Gastwirth, J. L. 2008. A method of assessing the sensitivity of the Cochran—Mantel-Haenszel test to
an unobserved confounder. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and
Engineering Sciences 366(1874), 2377-2388.

Yun, M.-S. 2004. Decomposing differences in the first moment. Economics Letters 82(2), 273-278.

Yun, M.-S. 2009. Wage differentials, discrimination and inequality: a cautionary note on the Juhn, Murphy
and Pierce decomposition method. Scottish Journal of Political Economy 56(1), 114-122.

Zhang, L. & Dong, X.-Y. 2008. Male-female wage discrimination in Chinese industry-investigation using
firm-level data. Economics of Transition 16(1), 85-112.

Zonta, M. M. 2012. Applying for home mortgages in immigrant communities: the case of Asian applicants in
Los Angeles. Environment and Planning 44(1), 89-110.

Zussman, A. 2012. Ethnic discrimination and identity manipulation. Working paper, Department of Economics,
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem.

https://doi.org/10.1017/S02698889 13000039 Published online by Cambridge University Press
